## Week6

# Normalization II

## Objectives

- Review of 1NF, 2NF and 3NF.
- `Boyce Codd Normal Form (BCNF)`
  - `1.1. BCNF Example 1`
  - `1.2. BCNF Example 2`
- `Creating New Relations in a Higher Normal Form`
- `Role of Normalization`
- `Advantages of Refinement (Top-Down) Approach`
- Class Activity 6 – Section one

## Review

### First Normal Form

- **No derived attribute** (Handled in the logic end)
  - `Example`: In the following relation `StuAge` is a derived attribute and should be removed
    - Student(StudentID, StuDateOfBirth, `StuAge`, StuAddress)
    - Student(StudentID, StuDateOfBirth, StuAddress)
- Every attribute value is **atomic** (can’t be divided into subparts)
  - `Example`: In the following relation `StuAddress` is a non-atomic attribute and should be divided to smaller parts
    - Student(StudentID, StuDateOfBirth, `StuAddress`)
    - Student(StudentID, StuDateOfBirth, StuUnitNumber, StuStreet, StuSuburb, StuState)

> Note: in the following slides “Customer Address” has been ASSUMED as an atomic attribute.

- **No multivalued** attributes (Multivalued attributes can have more than one value)

> - Based on this, a relation is in first normal form if:
>   - There are no repeating groups in the relation.
>   - A Primary key has been defined, which uniquely identifies each row in the relation

### Second Normal Form

> **1NF PLUS** every **non-key** attribute is **fully functionally dependent** on the ENTIRE PK

Every non-key attribute must be defined by the entire key, not by only part of the key. Meaning > NO **partial** functional dependencies

**Solution**:  

- Create new relation for each PK and move non-key attributes that are only dependent on this PK.
- Consider this PK as a Foreign Key (FK) in the original table (relation)

See S10

### Third Normal Form

> **2NF PLUS** no transitive dependencies (functional dependencies on non-PK attributes)

**Note**: This is called transitive, because the PK is a **determinant** for another attribute, which in turn is a **determinant** for a third

**Solution**:

- Non-key determinant with transitive dependencies go into a new table;
- Non-key determinant becomes primary key in the new table
- Stays as foreign key in the old table (relation)

> See 12

---

## `Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF)`

- A table is already in 3NF.
- Every determinant must be a candidate key
- **Simpler definition**: A relation is not in BCNF if:
  - Non-key > part of key
  - Part of key > Part of key

Special case that are not covered by 3NF (not common) Often occurs when there is more than one composite candidate key and they overlap

*See Slide 15 - 26*

## 3. Creating New Relations in a Higher Normal Form

**When decomposing a relation to create new relations in a higher normal form you should**:

1. Create a new relation for the FD group causing a violation
2. Create another new relation correspond to the original relation.
3. Copy the PK of the original relation to this new relation as its primary key 
4. Move the dependencies (RHS attributes) of the chosen FD in step one out of the original relation. Then put the rest of the none key attributes in the original relation into the new relation (that is created is Step 2) as its non-key attributes
5. Make the determinant (LHS) of the chose FD in step 1 a Foreign Key in the relation that is created in Step 2 (remember a copy was left behind)
6. Compute FDs for the new relations
7. Compute keys for the new relations:
8. Repeat for each FD until highest normal form is achieved
(the aim is 3NF or BCNF)

## 4. Role of Normalization

- **Refinement** (Top Down Design)
  - Use after ERD
  - Apply to table design or ERD
- **Initial design** (Bottom Up Design)
  - Record attributes and determine FDs
  - No initial ERD

## 5. Advantages of Refinement (Top-Down) Approach

- Easier to translate requirements into an ERD than list of FDs
- Fewer FDs to specify
- Fewer tables to split
- Easier to identify relationships especially M-N relationships without attributes

## Summary

- Beware of unwanted redundancies
- FDs are important constraints
- Strive for 3NF or BCNF 
- Focus on the normalization objective

`**Optional** Content _End`

---

## Class Activities

Online Camera Shop **Case Study**

- Every `customer` needs to **register** on the site by providing his/her personal information including name, home address, email address and contact phone number. **The system** will generate a **unique customer number** for each customer when his/her registration is successfully completed.
- `Customers` can **create their own private wish lists**, which contain their favorite cameras they wish to purchase. The system will **automatically generate a unique number for a `wishlist`** of a customer in order to trace all the `wishlists`. The system also **stores the date** that the wish list of the customer has been **created**. Within a `wishlist`, `customer` can **add as many cameras** as he or she likes. For **each entry** in a wish list, which is for one and **only one camera**, `customer` can make a brief **note**, for example, “this is my first choice”. A camera is described by a unique camera number, a camera name and a standard price.
- A `customer` may be **allocated to an `employee`** of the shop. An `employee` is described by a unique `employee` no, a name and a contact phone number. In order to **attract more sales**, the top manager will regularly **propose promotion** deals for customers to buy specific cameras. Each promotion deal is described by a start date, an expiry date and a discount rate for a specific camera model. **Some employees also act as supervisors for other employees.**

### Class Activity 1

Business Rules

- Cust register(CustID, name, email, addr,phone)
- Customer can create their own private wishlist
- Can add as many as they like
- Each entry on the list if only for 1 cam, Cust can make a brief note
- Each wishlist has a unique number & the created date
- Camera described by cam number, name & price
- Cust maybe alocated to an employee
- Employee (emNo, name, phone)
- Manager propose promotion deals for customers
- Poromotion include start date, an expiry & a discount rate for a specific model
- Some Emplouees also act as supervisors for other emps

### Class Activity 2:

**Convert** “wishlist” entity to the relation.

**Answer**:

- wishlist(<u>ListNo, CameraNo, custNo*</u>, creadedDate, cameraName, StdPrice, note)
- FK (custno) references customer


### Class Activity 3:

Determine **FDs** for the following business rules.

- SET1:
  > - **BR 4**: The system will automatically generate a unique number for a wish list of a customer in order to trace all the wish lists. 
  > - **BR 5**: The system also stores the date that the wish list of the customer has been created.
  - FD:
    - CustID > WishID, CreatedDate
    - WishID, CustID > CreatedDate
  
|Left|MID|RIGHT|
|---|---|---|
|CustID|ListID|CreatedDate|

- SET2
  > - **BR 6**: A Customer can add as many cameras as he or she likes to their wish list.
  > - **BR 7**: For one and only one camera, customer can make a brief note. for example, “this is my first choice”.
  - FD
    - AttrK: Customer, Camera, WishList, Note
    - Cust, List, Cam -> Note
- SET3
  > - **BR 8**: A camera is described by a unique camera number, a camera name and a standard price.
  - CNo > CName, CPrice

### Class Activity 4:

is wishList relation in 1NF, 2NF, 3NF and BCNF (optional)? If not normalize it.

> wishlist (listNo, cameraNo, custNo* createDate, cameraName, standardPrice, note)
>
> FK custNo references customer

> FDs:
>
> - custNo, ListNo > createDate
> - custNo, ListNo, camearNo > note
> - camearNo > cameraName, standardPrice  

Is the relation in **1NF**? `yes` attributes are atomoc, not derrived nor multivalued.

Is the relation in **2NF**? 

- Does it contain partial dependencies YES camera
- To correct this we need to create another relation CAMERA
- Modify wishlisth to exclude attibutes dependent with camera
- WISHLIST(List,Cust, CreateDate)
- WishLine(<u>(List,CustNO), CameraNo*</u>, note)
  - FK(list,cust) references wishlist

Is the relation in **3NF**?

The new created relations should be in 1NF, 2NF, 3NF and BCNF (optional) as well:

### Class Activity 5

Change the ERD based on the **normalization results**
