# Week 6 Activities

> Online Camera Shop

## Lecture 6 Activities

1. Convert “wishlist” entity to the relation.
2. Determine FDs for the following sets of business rules.
   - Set 1:
     - **BR 4**: The system will automatically generate a unique number for a wish list of a customer in order to trace all the wish lists. 
     - **BR 5**: The system also stores the date that the wish list of the customer has been created.
   - Set 2:
     - **BR 6**: A Customer can add as many cameras as he or she likes to their wish list. 
     - **BR 7**: For one and only one camera, customer can make a brief note. for example, “this is my first choice”.
   - Set 3:
     - **BR 8**: A camera is described by a unique camera number, a camera name and a standard price.
3. If the “wishList” relation is not in Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF), normalize it.
4. Change the ERD based on the normalization results.

---

## Tutorial 6 Activities

Online Camera Shop - Section 2: Employee

1. Determine business rules of the case study,
2. Convert “customer” entity to the relation.
3. Determine FDs for the following sets of business rules.
   - Set 1:
     - BR 1: Every customer needs to register on the site by providing his/her personal information including name, home address, email address and contact phone number.
     - BR 2: The system will generate a unique customer number for each customer
   - Set 2:
     - BR 9: A customer may be allocated to an employee of the shop.
   - Set 3:
     - BR 10: Every employee has a unique employee no, a name and a contact phone number.

4. If the “customer” relation is not in Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF), normalize it.
5. Change the ERD based on the normalization results.
