

    1. Discuss the following: 
    a. If an SQL statement includes a GROUP BY, the attributes that can be requested in the SELECT clause will be limited.  Explain that limitation.
    b. In what order are the clauses of an SQL statement processed?
    c. In an ORDER BY clause, what are the two ways to refer to the columns to be used for sorting the results of the query?
    d. What are the different purposes of the WHERE clause and the HAVING clause? Is it possible to use both a WHERE clause and a HAVING clause in the same SELECT statement? 
    e. What is the usage of “IN” and “OR” operators? These can substitute each other? How? 


Tutorial 7 Activities

    A. CREATE TABLE STATEMENTS 
A local pizza shop needs a new database to store the pizzas on their menu and the items on each pizza. The shop has a list of pizzas on their menu, a list of ingredients they use to make the pizzas and recipes of which ingredients go on which pizza. Compose the SQL script to create three tables, Menu, Items and Recipe, with the attributes included below.
    • MENU_New (pizza, price, country, base)
    • ITEMS_New (ingredient, type) 
    • RECIPE_New  (pizza*, ingredient*, amount)
FK (pizza) references MENU
FK (ingredient) references ITEMS

                1. Give CREATE TABLE statements to create the corresponding PostgreSQL tables.


    B. SIMPLE QUERY STATEMENTS

The following SQL exercises are based on 4 tables extracted from the Hospital database:

	Drug(DrugNo,DrugName,DrugDesc,DrugDosg,DrugMethod,DrugPrice)

	PrescribedDrug(DrugNo*,(PatCID,PatID)*,DrugAmt,StartDate,EndDate)
FK (DrugNo) references Drug
FK (PatCID,PatID) references PatMChart

	PatMChart(PatCID,PatID*,PatAdmDate,PatDisDate,PatSymp,PatDiag)
FK (PatID) references Patient

Patient(PatID,PatFName,PatLName,PatGender,PatDOB,PatStreet,
PatCity,PatState,PatPostcode,PatPhone,PatRDate)


create table Drug (
DrugNo		varchar(20),
	DrugName		varchar(20),
	DrugDesc		varchar(100),
	DrugDosg		varchar(50),
DrugMethod		varchar(50),
DrugPrice		real,
	PRIMARY KEY (DrugNo)
);
create table PrescribedDrug (
DrugNo		varchar(20),
	PatCID		varchar(20),
	PatID			varchar(20),
	DrugAmt		integer,
StartDate		date,
EndDate		date,
	PRIMARY KEY (DrugNo,PatCID,PatID),
FOREIGN KEY (DrugNo) REFERENCES Drug,
FOREIGN KEY (PatCID, PatID) REFERENCES PatMChart,
);
create table PatMChart (
	PatCID		varchar(20),
	PatID			varchar(20),
PatAdmDate		date,
PatDisDate		date,
PatSymp		varchar(100),
PatDiag		varchar(100),
	PRIMARY KEY (PatCID,PatID),
FOREIGN KEY (PatID) REFERENCES Patient
);
create table Patient (
	PatID			varchar(20),
	PatFName		varchar(20),
PatLName		varchar(20),
PatGender		char(1),
PatDOB		date,
PatStreet		varchar(50),
PatCity		varchar(20),
PatState		varchar(3),
PatPostcode	integer,
PatPhone		integer,
PatRDate		date,
	PRIMARY KEY (PatID)
);



Entity-Relationship Diagram


You can also use HospitalDB.sql (or HospitaDB.pdf) and Hospital-ERD that are in the following address to answer the tutorial questions: UTSonline/Learning Materials/Week 7/ Database Scripts for PostgreSQL.
QUERIES:

1. List all drugs in alphabetical order; show all columns.
2. List all drugs ordered by price in descending order, and DrugName in ascending order; show all columns.
   - `select * from drug order by drugprice desc, drugname`
3. List all drug method categories recorded in the drug table, eliminating duplicates.
   - `select distinct drugmethod from drug`
4. List all ‘Oral use with water’ drugs that cost less than $10.0.
   - `select * from drug where drugmethod = ‘Oral use with water’ and drugprice < 10`
5. List all drugs except those with dosage of “Every 4 hrs” or “Every 6 hrs”.
   - `select * from drug where drugdosg not in ('Every 4 hrs','Every 6 hrs');`
6. Give all information for the patients that live in Sydney, Mortdale, and Ultimo
   - `select * from patient where patcity in ('Sydney','Mortdale','Ultimo');`
7. List Drugs that cost between 10 and 20 dollars.
   - `select * from drug where drugprice < 20 and drugprice >10;`
8. List Drugs with name ending with letters 'ine'.
   - `select * from drug where drugname like '%ine';`
9.  List all Patient, giving First name, Last name and phone number where the Phone number has been specified (i.e. is not missing).
    - `select patfname, patlname, patphone from patient where patphone is not null;`
10. Give the total number of rows in the drug table.
    - `select count(*) from drug;`
11. How many different drug methods are recorded in the Drug table? 
    - `select count(distinct drugmethod) from drug;`
12. Give the price of the cheapest that Drug method is Oral use with water.
    - `select * from drug where drugmethod = 'Oral use with water' order by drugprice limit 1;`
13. Give the total price for Panadol and Aspirin Drugs.
    - `select drugname, drugprice from drug where drugname in ('Panadol','Aspirin');` 
14. Give the average price of drugs for each DrugMethod.
    - `select drugmethod, avg(drugprice) from drug group by drugmethod`
15. Give the average price of drugs for each drug method; do not include drug methods with only one drug.
    - `select drugmethod, avg(drugprice) from drug group by drugmethod having count(drugmethod) >1;`