# Tutorial 8 Activities

## InnerJoin Activities

- Construct a SELECT statement that contains an Equi-Join.
- Manually trace through the data using your SELECT statement to verify that it is correct, and that you understand exactly how the statement is executed.

**Note**: Before you start, read the create table statements and double check the name of the FKs in the tables. For example, staid is PK in STAFF table, and it is FK in NURSE table with different name i.e. nurid. 

1. List all the ward numbers that have staff members from Victoria state. Eliminate duplicate values.
   - ``
2. List all the ward numbers where staff from New South Wales state have worked in. Organize the list alphabetically descending and avoid duplicates in the result.
   - `` 
3. List all the ward numbers and the ward name that “Christopher Hanton” has worked in.
   - ``
4. List all the wards names where nurses have worked in “Night” shifts.
   - ``
5. List full name of all staff that live in the same state as staff employee S632.
   - ``
6. List full name and salary of staff who get paid more than Christopher Hanton (S632). 
   - ``
7. For Christopher Hanton (S632), give his salary, and list number and name of the wards he has worked in.
   - ``
8. List full name of the staff whose salary fall between the salary of Mikalya Vida (S837) and Natasha Laboureyas (S673), not inclusive.
   - ``

## OuterJoin Activities

- Construct a SELECT statement that contains Full outer join, Left Outer Join or Right Outer Join.
- Manually trace through the data using your SELECT statement to verify that it is correct, and that you understand exactly how the statement is executed.

1. List all ward numbers and staff ID of those who have worked in them. (Give two different ways of constructing this query).
   - ``
2. Which staff members have not worked in any wards?
   - ``
3. List all the available wards in 2014 (ward2014) and the capacity of those that are still available. 
   - ``
4. Which wards used to be active in 2014, and are not provided anymore?
   - ``
5. List all the wards that were available in both the ward2014 and the current wards?
   - ``