The Stocking Stock Company would like to **improve** their current **ordering process** and relationship with the suppliers.

The Stocking Stock Company would like to introduce an online order processing system and anticipates that the new online ordering system would help to **reduce** the overall **ordering process time** from 15 days to 10 days.

You are assigned as a Business Analyst to this project. Based on the initial interviews and workshops with stakeholders, you have identified the following information about the current ordering process.

The following activities take place in the Central Procurement Section (CPS) of the Stocking Stock Company with regards to their ordering process.

---

When the re-order point is reached for an **item**, Nigel Lon, the Stock Control Clerk calculates the new quantity to be ordered by referring to the past sales of that item over the last 12 months. 

He then fills in a Request to Purchase form and sends it to Mr Con in the CPS. Mr Con stores the purchase request details in a “Purchase
Request File.

Mr Con first looks up the purchase `history` records (purchase file) to find out from where the item was bought last time, and then he looks up a `suppliers` file to see who else could supply that particular item.

Based on the purchase request details, he then sends out a Request for Quote email to at least three supplier companies.

Supplier companies send the Quote with item prices and delivery times to Mr Con in the CPS. Mr Con stores the Quote information in a Quote File.
Mr Con reviews and selects the best supplier (based on quoted price), and prepares a purchase order. He sends the purchase order to his manager Mr Bert, who approves or disapproves the order. If the purchase order is approved, it is sent to the selected supplier.

Mr Con stores the purchase orders details with their status (approved or disapproved) in the purchase file and also notifies Nigel Lon about the purchase order decision (approval or disapproval) via an email.

The current ordering process could take approximately 15 business days from Request to Purchase to actually placing an order with an appropriate supplier.

About 5 days of this time is spent on the generation of “Requestn to Purchase”. The Request for Quote may take 5 days. About 5 days of the time is spent on actually selecting and placing an order with an appropriate supplier.
