## Week 8

# OO Modelling - class Modelling

## Recap -OO Modelling

- Last Half: Structured Analysis
  - What info do we need; where to get it?
  - How do we get the information we need?
  - How do we analyse the information?
- This Half: Object Oriented Analysis
  - Use Case Modelling
  - Class Modelling (This Lecture)
  - Interaction Modelling
  - State and Event Modelling

## Objectives

- Appreciate how OO modelling techniques assist with the undersanding the working of business systems
- Discover why system specifications are important and how OO modeling can be used to specify systems and user requirements
- Use object oriented system analysis techniques to develop a system model (Class Diagram/Model)

## Topics

- Components of a Class Diagram
- Relationship between Classes
- Rules for Class Diagram

## Class Diagram

- A **Class Diagram** is a type of static structure diagram that describes the structure of a system by showing the system's classes, attributes, operations (or methods), and the relationships among classes/objects.
- The class diagram is the main building block of object oriented modelling.
- It is used both for general conceptual modelling of the application, and for detailed modelling translating the models into programming code.
- Class diagram is not only used for visualizing, describing and documenting different aspects of a system but also for constructing executable code of the software application.
- can be used to define the scope of the project

### Examples

See slide 6, 7, 8

## Class

- A class is an **abstract definition** of an object.
- A class is a plan or a blueprint from which one or more objects can be created. Whereas an object represents real world things, both tangible and intangible. 
- A class is a description of a set of objects that share:
  - Attributes
  - Operations
  - Relationships
- Graphically, a class is rendered as a **rectangle**, usually including its name, attributes, and operations in separate, designated compartments.
- Class is comprised of attributes and operations(methods) that manipulates the attrs
- Real-world obj share 2 chars: They all have state (attr/Fields) and behavior (methods).

See slide 11

### Attributes

- Attr describes charactersitics or are the dedscription of the class ( see slide 12 for notation)
- Class stores its state in attr and keyword to id attributes(var name) and its data type.
- you can specify the data type for each attr.

### Methods

- describes the possible behaviours of a class, appears in the third box ( slide 13)
- They are actions that can be called to execute,
- wtf are these definitions

## Relationships

There are four kinds of relationships between classes:

- Associations
- Aggregation
- Composition
- Generalisations

**NOTE**: this for quizz

## Associations

- An association is a relationship between classes that indicates meaningful and interesting connection.
- An association is represented as a bold unbroken line between two classes.
- Example: “A Person works for a Company”
- To clarify its meaning, an association may be named.
  - The name is represented as a label placed midway along the association line.
  - Usually a verb or a verb phrase.

See slide 15

### Associations Multiplicity

- Multiplicity
  - An indication of how many objects may participate in the given relationship.
  - Multiplicity is shown at the ends of an association.
  - A person works for one company.
  - A company has one or more people working in it.

see slide 16 similar to erd cardinality, but how is this class

### Common Multiplicity

Multiplicity Indicators

| Desc | Notation |
|:---|:---:|
|Exactly one | 1|
|Zero or more | (0..*)|
|One or more | 1..* |
|Zero or One | 0..1 |
|Specified Range | 2..4|
|Exactly three, five or eight | 3, 5, 8|

### Aggregation and Composition Relationships

- **Aggregation** and **Composition** relationship between classes is a special form of association that models a **whole-part relationship** between the whole and its parts.

**NOTES**: important for quizz

#### Aggregation

- A special form of association that models a whole-part relationship between an aggregate (the whole) and its parts.
  - Models a “is a part of” relationship.
  - `see slide 19`
- Aggregation is a “has a” temporary structural relationship (weak association).
- Consists of a whole and its parts
- Examples:
  - Library has Books
  - Subject has Students
  - Constituency has Voters
- If the whole is removed, the part may still exist.
  - e.g. If Library is closed/removed, the Books may still exist
  - e.g. If Subject is closed/removed, the Students still exist
- Represented by a hollow white diamond at the end of the line that is not filled in, points to the class that holds the other class.

See Slide 20

#### Composition

- A strong form of relationship.
- Shown with a filled-in black diamond at the end of a line.
- The whole has a responsibility for the parts.
- If the whole is removed, the parts are also removed.
- The life time of the part is dependent upon the whole. 
  - The composite must manage the creation and destruction of its parts. Water is a part-of a Pond. (Pond is a composition of water)

See Slide 21

### Composition v Aggregation

- see slide 22 (A and B are classes)
- There is a whole part relationship between classes/objects in both. 
- The **distinction** between aggregation and composition  relationship depends on **context of the problem**.
- For example: Composition: Water is a part-of a Pond. (Pond is a composition of water) Aggregation: Pond has ducks and fishes (Pond aggregates ducks and fishes)
- Example2: 
  - Composition (Person, Heart, Hand), "sub objects" (Heart, Hand) will be destroyed as soon as Person is destroyed (dead).
  - Aggregation (City, Tree, Car) "sub objects" (Tree, Car) may NOT be destroyed when City is destroyed.
- The bottom line is, composition stresses on mutual existence, and in aggregation, this property is NOT required.

## Generalization Relationships

- A generalization connects a subclass to its superclass.
- It denotes an **inheritance** from the superclass to the subclass and indicates a specialization in the subclass of the more general superclass.

### Generalisation / Specialisation Relationships

slide 24 - 25

## Summary of Relationships

slide 26

## Steps in Developing a Class Diagram

1. Identify Classes
  - Nouns, concepts, place, people
  - E.g. Subject, Teacher, Administrator, Enrolment
2. Identify Attributes
  - Possessive phrases; look for the word “has”
  - E.g. Student’s name, id, code of the course
3. Identify Operations/Methods
  - Verbs, verbal phrases; look for the word “can”
E.g. Student can enrol in a Subject
4. Identify Relationships between classes
  - Association, composition, aggregation and generalisation
5. Define Multiplicities

### What do we have at this stage?

- Use Cases
  - Use case diagram
  - Scenarios/Use Case Narratives

Agreed by the users or their representatives

### Class Diagram: (Where to from here?)

We did

1. User stories (2w ago)
2. Use Case Diagram (lastweek)
3. Use Case Scenarios or Narratives (lastweek)
4. Class Diagram

**NOTE**: read the use case narratives for all use cases and id Classes and its attr + methods

### Exercise 

- Ticketing System Example from last lecture
- Relate to Assignment 2

### Use Case Diagram

slide 31

### Buy Ticket Use Case Narrative – from last week

- Refer the Buy Ticket use case narrative from last lecture, available in week 7 folder. 
- Read the narrative and follow the following 3 steps:
  1. Find Classes/Objects (look for nouns)
  2. Identify attributes  and methods for each class
  3. Identify the relationship and multiplicities between classes.


### Exercise - Class Diagram

slide 33

## Summary

- Classes
- Types
- Relationships
- Application Example

> - Assignment 2 Hint: Convert ERD into Class Diagram
> - So far you should have finished your User Stories and Use Case Narratives for assignment 2.
> - Read the narratives and identify  Classes and its attributes and methods.
