## Lecture 8: Week 9 

# Object Oriented Models with UML- Interaction Modelling with Sequence Diagrams

## Recap

- Last Week
  - Class Modelling
- This Week
  - Interaction Modelling (**Sequence Diagrams**)
  - How do objects (or actors) interact with each other (or the system of interest) to execute the functionality of a use case narrative/scenario

## Interaction Diagram (Sequence Diagram)

Show Relationship with Use Cases and Process Model s3

## Interaction Diagrams

- The UML includes Interaction Diagrams to illustrate how objects interact via messages.
- Interaction diagrams model how group of objects collaborate to perform some behaviour.
- There are two types of Interaction Diagrams:
  - Sequence Diagram
  - Communication Diagram

### Sequence Diagram: 

- Sequence Diagram:
  - A graphical/visual representation of a scenario/narrative of a use case. Typically, it captures the behaviour and visualises a use case.
  - Objects are identified in the process or use case narrative and represented as a “Lifeline box”
  - Shows communication between the identified objects in terms of **messages** that are passed from source to target lifeline over a period of time 
  - Shows a succession of interactions (methods) between classes or object instances over time in a sequence.

### Example of a System Sequence Diagram

see 6

### Sequence Diagram: Notations

see s7

- Lifeline box representing a participant: System, Object, Actor  (Class)
- (object name: ClassName)
- Message line
- Activation bar (execution bar)
- Lifeline
The X at the bottom of an Activation bar indicating object destruction (optional)

### Sequence Diagram Components

- Sequence diagrams illustrate interactions in a kind of **fence format**, in which each new object is added to the right as shown on previous slide.
- Sequence diagrams have a **tabular layout**
  - Columns and Rows
- Columns
  - **Lifeline box** - an individual **participant (Object/Class/Actor)** in a sequence diagram represented in a rectangular box
  - Objects represented as “Lifeline box” are column “Headings”
  - **Activation/execution bar** shows the period of time during which an operation/method executes and is shown along the lifeline.
    - It indicates the focus of control and how long the object is active.
  - First Lifeline or column initiates the  interaction or communication
- Rows
  - Messages are in the rows and messages are sequenced in **Time Order** from top to bottom

### Sequence Diagram Components

- Lifeline Boxes and Lifelines
  - Object or Actor or System composed of objects
  - Lifeline boxes include a dashed vertical line extending below them which represents the actual lifeline of an object during interaction.

- Message
  - Synchronous
  - Asynchronous
  - Conditional Message
  - Loops or Iterations
  - Alternative “alt” and Optional “opt” fragments

### Sequence Diagram: Messages

- **Normal arrows** represent messages or signals sent between classes.
  - **Solid arrowheads** represent synchronous calls (the sending class waits for a response).
  - Synchronous calls are more like functions (value returning methods).
- Half arrowheads represent asynchronous calls (sent without waiting for a returning signal). `sl0`
- Asynchronous calls are like procedures (void methods).

See the notes section of this slide `s11`

### System Sequence Diagram

see 12

### Sequence Diagram: (Where to from here?)

1. User stories
2. use Case Diagram
3. useCase Scenarios or Narratives
4. Sequence Diagram (one for each use case narrative)

### Use Case Diagram from Week 7 Lecture

s14

### Steps in drawing a Sequence Diagram for Buy Ticket Use Case Narrative

- Refer the Buy Ticket use case narrative from Week 7 Lecture available in week 7 folder on uts online. 
- Read the narrative and follow the following steps:
  - Find Participants: Classes/Objects (look for nouns)
  - Identify messages/methods by finding verbs and verb phrases. These will become your messages in the sequence diagram.

#### System Sequence Diagram for “Buy Ticket”

sl6 - 18 converting usecase for buy ticket

### Object Sequence Diagram (at Object level)

s19 Shows all the objects within the System

### Class Diagram from last week revisited

s20

### Object Sequence Diagram (interaction between objects of OT System)

s21

- Shows all the objects within the OT System

### Diagram Frames in Sequence Diagram

- To support conditional and looping constructs, the UML uses frames.
- Frames are regions or fragments of the diagrams; they have an operator or label (such as loop) and a guard (conditional clause).
Some common frame operators:
  - **alt**: For conditional messages (for example, if condition)
  - **loop**: To implement a looping or iterative message
  - **opt**: Optional fragment that executes if guard is true. Could be used for exceptions in a use case narrative. 

### Sequence Diagram Conditional Messages

s23

### Sequence Diagram: Iterative Messages

s24

#### Example Scenario – Booking a room

- Customer queries for available rooms
- Store customer details
- Check diary for room availability
- Room is available
- Advise customer of availability
- Customer requests reservation
- Provisionally book room
- Figure out price and advise customer
- Customer accepts terms
- Provisionally book room
- Check customer credit
- Customer credit Is OK
- Reserve room

### Step 1: Identify Participants: Classes/Objects (Nouns)

- **Customer** Queries for Available **Rooms**
- Store **Customer** Details
- Check **Diary** for Room Availability
- **Room** is Available
- Advise **Customer** of Availability
- **Customer** Requests Reservation
- Provisionally Book **Room**
- Figure Out Price and Advise **Customer**
- **Customer** Accepts Terms
- Provisionally Book **Room**
- Check **Customer** Credit
- **Customer** Credit Is OK
- Reserve **Room**

### Step 2: Identify Messages/Methods (Verbs)

- Customer **Queries** for Available Rooms
- **Store** Customer Details
- **Check** Diary for Room Availability
- Room is Available
- **Advise** Customer of Availability
- Customer **Requests** Reservation
- Provisionally **Book** Room
- Figure Out Price and Advise Customer
- Customer **Accepts** Terms
- **Check** Customer Credit
- Customer Credit Is OK
- **Reserve** Room

see model at s28 and More Formal at s29

### Relationship between Class Diagram and Sequence Diagram

s30

## Summary

- Lifeline box: Actor or System or Object
- Lifeline
- Interaction or Communication
- Sequence
- Messages