## Week 10 Lecture

# Object Oriented Models with UML -

## Outline

- **Last Week**
  - Interaction Modelling (Sequence Diagrams)
  - Message passing between objects
  - Synchronous and Asynchronous messages
- This Week
  - State and Event Modelling (State Transition Diagrams)
  - Show different states of an object.

## Classes and Objects

- A Class is a definition of Objects.
- A Class is a template or a blueprint for creating Objects.
- An Object is an instance of a Class. One to many objects can be created from a class.

## Objects

- Properties/Data/State that is defined by
  - Attributes of the class
- Behavior that is defined by
  - Methods of the class

### State and Event Modelling

- A state transition diagram shows the various states of a single object.
  - There must be a separate state transition diagram for each object/class in your class diagram.
  - It helps analysts, designers and developers understand the behaviour of the objects in the system. They won’t have to guess about what the object is supposed to do.
  - State-transition diagrams are very useful for describing the behavior of individual objects over the full set of use cases that affect those objects.
  - Create State Transition Diagrams when the business logic for a particular flow is very complex, or needs greater understanding by the developer to be coded perfectly.

### Why State and Event Modelling?

- To track an object’s lifecycle.
- To provide status of an object at a given point in time.
- To better understand the several states that an object goes through.

### State and Event Modelling

- Show an object’s states, and the events that cause them to transition between states.
- Movement from one state to another is called transition, and is triggered by an event. When its triggering event occurs a transition is said to fire.
- An event happens at a specific time and place.
  - Events cause a change of state for an object as the transition “fires”

- Objects change their state in response to events (time and non-time events).
  - e.g. When you press a switch/button, a Light object changes its state from off  to on.
  - e.g. The changeCourse() method changes the state of the Student object.
  - e.g. The enrol() method changes the state of the Student object from being ‘prospective’ to ‘enrolled’.
- Each time an object changes state, some of its attributes must change.

### UML Syntax for State Transition

Notation on slide 12

Example 1 slide 13
ref http://www.developer.com/design/article.php/2238131

Example2: (sl14) State Transition Diagram for the “Buyer” object

Example3: (sl15) State Transition Diagram for the“SalesPerson” object

Sequence Diagram (sl16) For a Telephone Call

Example4 (sl17): State Transition Diagram for “Exchange” object

#### State Transition Diagram including alternate scenario for Exchange object

sl 18

#### Sequence Diagram  for ATM Machine

sl 19

Example5: State Transition Diagram for ATM machine Object

sl 20

State Transition for ATM machine with alternatives

sl 21

Example6: State Transition Diagram for “Reservation” object (for hotel room reservation)

sl 22

### State Transition Diagram

- Ticketing System Example
  - (sl24) Use Case Diagram for Ticketing System
  - (sl25) System Sequence Diagram for “Buy Ticket”
  - (sl26) System Sequence Diagram for Ticketing System
  - (sl27) Object Sequence Diagram for Ticketing System
  - (sl28) Class Diagram for Ticketing System 
  - (sl29) State Transition Diagram for “Ticket” object
    - Using the Use Case Narrative/s and Sequence Diagrams, you can identify the several States of the “Ticket” object and the Events that cause this transition/changes to these states of the Ticket object.
    - Whats missin in the (sl29) Diagram

## Summary

- States (different states of an Object)
- Event (events that cause the transition/change in states)
- State Transition Diagrams (one for each Object/Class), so you can/may draw a separate diagram for each object/class in your class diagram to better understand the several States that an object goes through.

## Assignment 2

- State Transition Diagram (one for “Customer” object)
- User Interface Requirements (refer ATM example provided in Task 5 of Week 3 Workshop)
- Security Requirements
- Performance Requirements
- Use Assignment 2 Template provided to you
- Refer FAQ – available soon
- Assignment 2 is due next week on 27 May at 10:00 PM

Conclusion
This Week’s Workshop
Quiz 8 – Interaction Modelling (3 marks)
Tasks – State and Event Modelling