# Context of Software Architecture

## Context

> Solutions must fit the context

Comprise of

- Functional Requirements
- Goals/Objectives of stakeholder
- Constraints/enablers, Risk, Opportunities.

### Stakeholder

- Customers, Owner, Users, Customer's customer.
- Developers, Sysadmin (people whom will work with the system)

#### Stakeholder goals

Identify the goals systematicly

- Functional goals
  - Stakeholder's goals
- Non-Func goals
  - Syst/tech qualities, performance (security, maintainability, usability, modifiability, testability)
- Tech Goals
- Organization capability goals

### Constraint and enablers

- Constraints
  - Time
  - Money
  - Resource
  - Expertise
  - Technology
  - Intergration to existing system.
- Enablers

### Risks

- ID risks systematically.
  - Who is effected, how can this effect the stakeholders.
- Examine persistent failure in experience
  - All organization have a collection of failure stories.

### Opportunities

- Develop the same product for many customers.

---

## Role of Architecture

### With in the SDLC

- Before staring work on the development of the architecture. Its important to figgure out the major requirements to develop a sound architecture
- Its a mistake to skip the designing phase thinking it can be made as you go

### System lifetime

- 80% of system life time is in maintence, there fore think about the maintainability of the system when designing
- Most trouble comes from
  - When the system needs to speed up
  - when technology changes, circumstance change that causes system crash.
  - Was the system implemented so its easy to debug and patch it.

### Trouble

- Confuse program design with SWA
- Staying in the comfort zone as programmer( Programmer code as you go, software engineers plan)
- Wanting to work as you go. (encouraged by agile)
- Projects are getting more and more complex then how much we can reason about with out an external representation.

### Summary context

- architecture need to last a long time as most of the SLDC is spent in maintenace.

---

## Examples

- Engineer uses alot of models. Easier to test out different scenarios.

### Web bulletin board

- 3 ttier architecture, common in web apps (MVC)
- Security complications.
- Maintainability

### Image processing

- Alot of attention is on converting from one format to another
  - in medical imaging
    - Each of the devices have their own format
    - How is each image format maintained (storage, printing, conversion)

### Embedded devices

- IoT, Autonomous vehicles
- Often limited by limited resources, processing power
- Need to have predictable functions.

### Work flow management system
