## Week 6 Lecture

# Software Requirements Specification (SRS) and Documentation

## Objectives

- Understand the difference between agile and traditional software requirement specification (IEEE SRS).
- Discover how **user stories** can be used to specify **software requirements**
- Understand how **user stories** are estimated and prioritised.

## Requirements Analysis 

- **REVIEW** How to analyse and model the elicited requirements? `Business Process Modeling (BPM) & Data Modeling (ERD)
- **THIS WEEK** How do we analyse these process and data models and document the software requirements?

> How do we use these business processes to identify the user stories?

## Topics

- Software Requirements Specification (SRS)
- Content & Structure of Software Requirement Specification
- Traditional IEEE SRS vs User Stories (Agile approach)

## Software Requirements Specification (SRS) definition


- **Software Requirements Specification** is a document that provides the detailed description of what the **system should do**.

- structured document setting out the system **services** and **capabilities** in detail
- sometimes called as **functional specification**
- often serves as a **contract** between the client and vendor

## **Purpose** of Software Requirements Specifications (SRS)

- **Analyse** elicited requirements
- **Define** what designers/developers need to build
- **Verification** against the delivered system
- **Validating** what stakeholders wants
- Baseline for software **evaluation**
- Support for **testing** (verification and validation)

## IEEE Standard for SRS

Standard format for IEEE SoftWare Requirement Specification

1. **Intro**
   - Purpose
   - Scope (`ID product & application domain`)
   - Definitions, Acronyms, Abbreviations
   - Reference Docs
   - Overview (`Describe content & structure of the remaining SRS`)
2. **Overal Description**
   - Product perspective (`Describe external interfaces: syst, user, hardware/software; also operations & site adaptation, &bhardware constraints`)
   - Product Functions (`Ssummary of major fuctions e.g usecase`)
   - User Characteristics 
   - Constraints (`regulations, reliability, criticality, hardware limitation, parallelism`)
   - Assumption & Dependencies
3. Specific Requirements
   - Contains ALL REQUIREMENTS (main body of the doc)
   - IEEE STD provides 8 different templates for this part

- Apendicies
- Index

## **Agile** Requirements Specification: Template adapted in this subject

1. Document Management
   - Revision History
   - Intended audience
   - Reference Documents
   - Glossary
2. Introduction
   - Document Purpose
   - Project Purpose
   - Project Scope
     - In Scope
     - Out of Scope
   - Assumptions
3. Functional Requirements
   - User Story Map
   - User Stories and Use Cases
     - Use Case: Name of the Use Case
     - Use Case:
   - Sequence Diagrams
4. Data Requirements
   - Class Diagrams
   - State Transition Diagram
5. Non-functional requirements
   - User Interface Requirements
   - Security Requirements
   - Performance Requirements
6. Bibliography
7. Appendices

## SRS: Role and Purpose

- Can act as a **Legal Document**: A contractual device for judging the completion of the specified job.
- **Functional device** for improving the understanding of the customer’s real **needs** (both in **business** and **technical** terms). It is a **communication device** that conveys an **understanding** between different teams in the software development process.
- Used as basis for a user manual.
- **Statement of commitment**.
- **Validation device** for validating the requirements stated in a formal manner.
- Used to develop **test cases**.

## Requirements Specification

- **Traditional aspects**
  - Upfront and detailed
  - Simple plain language requirements statements
  - Structured use cases (next week’s lecture)
- **Agile aspects**
  - Iterative
  - User stories: card, conversation, confirmation
  - User story map
  - User story estimation and prioritisation 
  - User story or agile card wall

## SCRUM at a glance

### Sprints

- A sprint/ iteration is the basic unit of development in **Scrum**. Scrum projects make progress in a **series of “sprints”**.
  - Analogous to Extreme Programming iterations
- Typical duration is 2–4 weeks or a calendar month at most
- A constant duration leads to a better rhythm.
- Product is **designed**, **coded**, and **tested** during the sprint.
- Each sprint starts with a **sprint planning event**, the aim of which is to define a **sprint backlog**, where the work for the sprint is **identified** and an estimated commitment for the **sprint goal** is made.
- Each sprint ends with a **sprint review** and a **sprint retrospective**, where the progress is **reviewed** and lessons for the next sprint are identified.

### Iterative and incremental development

- The basic idea behind this method is to **develop a system through repeated cycles** (iterative) and in smaller portions at a time (incremental), allowing software developers to take advantage of what was learned during development of earlier parts or versions of the system to better build it.
- **Learning** comes from both the **development** and **use** of the system, where possible key steps in the process start with a **simple implementation** of a subset of the software requirements and **iteratively enhance** the evolving versions **until the full system is implemented**.
- **Incremental development** slices the system functionality into increments (portions). In each increment, a slice of functionality is **delivered through cross-discipline work**, from the requirements to the deployment. 

> **Sequential vs. overlapping development**
>
> - Rather than Doing one task at a time
> - Scrum teams do alittle of everything all the time

## Scrum Framework

- Roles
  - **Product owner**
  - **Scrum Planner**
  - **Team**
Represents the stakeholders and is the voice of the customer and is accountable for ensuring that the team delivers value to the business.
Writes (or has the team write) customer-centric items (typically user stories), ranks and prioritizes them, and adds them to the product backlog.
Defines the features of the product
Decides on release date and content
Responsible for the profitability of the product (ROI)
Prioritizes features according to market value 
Adjusts features and priority every iteration, as needed  
Accepts or rejects work results

The ScrumMaster
Is a Facilitator
Represents management to the project
Responsible for enacting Scrum values and practices
Removes impediments 
Ensure that the team is fully functional and productive
Enables close cooperation across all roles and functions
Shields the team from external interferences
The Team
Typically 5-9 people
Cross-functional:
Programmers, testers, user experience designers, etc.
The development team is responsible for delivering potentially shippable increments (PSIs) of product at the end of each sprint (the sprint goal).
Teams are self-organizing
Ideally, no titles but rarely a possibility
Membership should change only between sprints
SRS: An agile aspect - User Story

User stories are short, simple description of a feature told from the perspective of the person who desires the new capability, usually a user or customer of the system.
They are short descriptions of functionality–told from the perspective of a user–that are valuable to either a user of the software or the customer of the software. 

(http://www.gatherspace.com/static/use_case_example.html; http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/agile/user-stories)
User Story Template
User Stories (e.g. feature, epic, scenario) follow a simple template:
"As a -role-, I want -goal/desire- so that -benefit-“
User Story Template
As a <type of user>, I want/need/can <some goal> so that <some reason>. 
     (http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/topics/user-stories)
User Story Examples:
As a student, I want to download BRM subject lecture notes from the UTSOnline System so that I can prepare for the final exam. 
As a lecturer, I want to upload BRM subject lecture notes on the UTSOnline System so that I can deliver lecture. 







User Story Examples
User Story Examples:

As a passenger, I want to buy a ticket via Online Ticketing System so that I can travel from one city to another city in Australia. 

As a user closing the application, I want to be prompted to save anything that has changed since the last save so that I can preserve useful work and discard erroneous work.






User stories: Purpose
User Story is not a whole requirement, 
It serves as placeholders for conversations about the users’ detailed needs. It is a starting point of conversation and confirmation between the analyst and stakeholders (e.g. product owner or process owner).
Based on the User Story, you have further conversations with the user or proxy user and identify the additional details. The Product Owner has further conversations with developers.
planned for project releases and iterations
written on a story card, index cards or sticky notes
stored in a shoe box, and arranged on walls or tables to facilitate planning (releases and iterations) and discussion
they strongly shift the focus from writing about features to discussing them. These discussions are more important than whatever text is written.
(http://www.gatherspace.com/static/use_case_example.html)
User Stories: Estimation and Prioritisation
Each User story:
estimated in terms time taken to complete a user story
prioritised (importance) for each release

User Stories: Estimation
Common methods to estimate the time to complete each user story include:
T-shirt sizes (S, M, L, and too big)
Powers of 2 (1, 2, 4, 8)
The Fibonacci sequence (1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, etc.)
Story Point (1 to 10) - (method used in this subject)




User Stories: Importance/Prioritisation
Requirement prioritisation is used in software product management for determining which candidate requirements of a software product should be included in a certain release. 
Requirements (user stories) are also prioritized to minimise risk during development so that the most important or high risk requirements (user stories) are implemented first. 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Requirement_prioritization





User Stories: Importance and Prioritisation
Common methods to prioritise (importance) of each user story include:
MoSCoW method (Must, Should, Could, Would/Won’t) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MoSCoW_method

Weighted Shortest Job First (WSJF)
http://agile102.blogspot.com.au/2013/01/weighted-shortest-job-first-bit-of-safe.html
http://www.scaledagileframework.com/wsjf/

High, Medium, Low (HML) -  (method used in this subject)




User Story Map: Tutorial Case Study 






Agile Card Wall






Additional useful terms
An Epic or a feature is a large user story. Because an epic is generally too large for an agile team to complete in one iteration, it is split into multiple smaller user stories before it is worked on.
Epics will later be decomposed into smaller stories that fit more readily into a single iteration.
Theme is a collection of related user stories.




Tools
MS Office
Rally 
IBM Jazz Hub
JIRA
Mingle



Agile Requirements Specification: Template adapted in this subject
1.	Document Management
1.1	Revision History	
1.2	Intended Audience	
1.3	Reference Documents	
1.4	Glossary	

2.	Introduction	
2.1	Document Purpose	
2.2	Project Purpose	
2.3	Project Scope	
2.3.1	In Scope	
2.3.2	Out of Scope	
2.4	Assumptions	

3.	Functional Requirements
3.1	User Story Map	
3.2	User Stories and Use Cases
	
3.2.1	Use Case: Name of the Use Case
3.2.2	Use Case:	
3.3	Sequence Diagrams	

4.	Data Requirements	
4.1	Class Diagram	
4.2	State Transition Diagram	

5.	Non-functional requirements
5.1	User Interface Requirements	
5.2	Security Requirements	
5.3	Performance Requirements	

6.	Bibliography	

7.	Appendices	



Summary
SRS has may roles and purposes
SRS has different audiences
Good SRS are hard to write: they have to conform to some quality attributes
There are different structures one can use for writing SRS
Traditional IEEE SRS are now replaced with User Stories on Agile projects.
Each user story must be estimated and prioritised
Conclusion
This Week’s Workshop 
Quiz 4 – Data Modelling (3 marks) 
Tasks – Software Requirement Specification 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------        
Next Lecture (week starting 29 April – after STUVAC)
Object Oriented Models with UML- Use Case Modelling 
Next Workshop
Quiz 5 – Software Requirements Specification (3 marks) 
Tasks – Use Case Modelling

Reminder: Assignment 1 is due on 29/04/2019
