­# Week 6. Review Questions

## SECTION 3.5

### R14. True or false?

1. Host A is sending Host B a large file over a **TCP** connection. Assume Host B has no data to send Host A. Host B will not send acknowledgments to Host A because Host B cannot piggyback the acknowledgments on data. `FALSE`
2. The size of the **TCP rwnd** never changes **throughout the duration** of the connection. `FALSE`
3. Suppose Host A is sending Host B a **large file over a TCP connection**. The number of unacknowledged bytes that A sends cannot exceed the size of the receive buffer. `TRUE` (loss control? B sends A the amt of data can be sent)
4. Suppose Host A is sending a large file to Host B over a **TCP connection**. If the **sequence number** for a **segment** of this connection is m, then the sequence number for the **subsequent segment** will necessarily be m+1. `FALSE` shouldbe mbyte+sent byte length
5. The TCP segment has a field in its header for rwnd.
6. Suppose that the last SampleRTT in a TCP connection is equal to 1 sec. The current value of TimeoutInterval for the connection will necessarily be ≥1 sec. `FALSE`
7. Suppose Host A sends one segment with sequence number 38 and 4 bytes of data over a TCP connection to Host B. In this same segment the acknowledgment number is necessarily 42. `FALSE`

### R15. Suppose Host A sends two TCP segments back to back to Host B over a TCP connection. The first segment has sequence number 90; the second has sequence number 110.

1. How much data is in the first segment?
2. Suppose that the first segment is lost but the second segment arrives at B. In the acknowledgment that Host B sends to Host A, what will be the acknowledgment number?

### R16. Consider the Telnet example discussed in Section 3.5. A few seconds after the user types the letter ‘C,’ the user types the letter ‘R.’ After typing the letter ‘R,’ how many segments are sent, and what is put in the sequence number and acknowledgment fields of the segments?

## SECTION 3.7

### R17. Suppose two TCP connections are present over some bottleneck link of rate R bps. Both connections have a huge file to send (in the same direction over the bottleneck link). The transmissions of the files start at the same time. What transmission rate would TCP like to give to each of the connections?

### R18. True or false? Consider congestion control in TCP. When the timer expires at the sender, the value of ssthresh is set to one half of its previous value.
