## Week 7

# Object Oriented Modelling - Use Case Modelling

---

## Notes for exam

See Usecase Template **Important for exam**

Note the format of the main flow **veryImportant**

Usecase Diagram seems important too

## Notes for A2

Assesment 2 template in w6 - w7 slides

---


> References
>
> Object Oriented Systems Analysis and Design Using UML, 4th Edition by Farmer, Ray, McRobb- Chapters  6 and A2

## Where to from here?

- Last Half: **Structured Analysis**
  - What info do we need; where to get it from?
  - How do we get the information we need?
  - How do we analyse the information?

- This Half: **Object Oriented Analysis**
  - Use Case Modelling (This Lecture)
  - Class Modelling
  - Interaction Modelling
  - State and Event Modelling

## Objectives

- Appreciate how **Object Oriented (OO) modelling** techniques can help to understand the working of business systems
- Discover why **system specifications** are important and how **OO modeling** can be used to specify systems and user requirements
- Use object oriented system analysis techniques to develop a **system model (Use Case Model)**

## Topics

- Structured Analysis
- Object Oriented Analysis
- Unified Modelling Language (UML)
- Use Case Modelling and Narrative
- Use Case Application Example

## Structured Analysis Focus

- Identifying and Modelling:
  - Processes (BPMN)
    - Actions & transformations
  - Data (ERD)
    - Consumed and produced by the system

## Object Oriented Analysis Focus

- Identifying and Modelling:
  - Objects
- Represent real-world things
  - Objects contain
    - Methods or Processes
    - Attributes or Data

## Different Application Models

- **Structured Approach**
  - Application is a **collection of processes** organised into a system
  - processes interact via flows of data
  - processes accept inputs and produce outputs
- **OO Approach**
  - Application is a **collection of interacting objects**
  - Objects interact with people and each other
  - Objects send and respond to messages/methods (I/O?)

## Comparison of Structured and OO Approach

Slide 8

| OO analysis focus             | Structured analysis focus |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Methods and Attributes        | Data and Process          |
| Obj, class, event Description | Process Description       |
| Use Case                      | BPMN                      |
| State transistion             | Data Description          |
| UnifiedModellingLanguage      | ERD                       |

## Object Oriented Modeling Language

- The Unified Modeling Language
- UML is a **standard** language for *specifying*, *visualizing*, *constructing*, and *documenting* the artefacts of software systems.
- **UML 2.X** is an Industry standard developed to support OO analysis and design
- UML is a pictorial language used to make software blue prints.
- UML diagrams are not only made for developers but also for business users, common people and anybody interested to understand the system.

### OO Modelling Using UML – Different models used in OO

Slide10

## Object Oriented Modeling Tools

- Visual Paradigm
- [IBM Rational Modeler](hhttp://www-1.ibm.com/software/awdtools/modeler/)
- MS Visio
- Sparx Enterprise Architect

## Use Case Model and Narratives: Development Steps involved

1. User Stories(L6)
2. Use case Diagram
3. Use case Scenarios or Naratives
4. User Interface or Wireframe Screenshot

**NOTE**: User story can be detailed in terms of 1 or many Use Cases

## Use Case Model/Diagram

**Use case diagram** contains four components:

- **System boundary**, which defines the **system of interest** (scope) in relation to the world around it.
- **Actors**, could be a person, organization, or external system that plays a role in one or more **interactions with your system**.
- **Use cases**, is a generalized description of a set of **interactions** between the system and actors. The system functionalities are captured in use cases.
- **Relationships** between and among the actors and the use cases.

### Use Case Model: Example

Slide 14

#### System Boundary

- The **rectangle** around the use cases is the **system boundary**, it indicates the scope of your system - the use cases inside the rectangle represent the **functionality** that you intend to **implement**.

Slide 15

#### Actor

An actor is a person, organization, or external system that plays a role in one or more **interactions** with your system

#### Use Cases

- A use case is a **generalized description** of a **set of interactions** between the system and actors. A use case describes a **sequence of actions** performed by a system for a **specific goal**. The system **functionalities** are captured in use cases.
- A **use case** is drawn as a **horizontal ellipse/oval** in a use case diagram. Use case name begins with a verb.

#### Relationship

- The **relationships** between and among actors and use cases **links an Actor to a Use Case**
- There are several types of relationships that may appear on a use case diagram:
  - An association between an actor and a use case
  - An association between two use cases (includes and extends)
    - Includes : must happen
    - Extend: 
  - A generalization between two actors
  - A generalization between two use cases
- **Associations** are lines with **general modeling element**an optional open arrow head on one end of the line indicating the direction of the **initial invocation** of the relationship.
- **Generalizations** are depicted as a close-headed arrow with the arrow pointing towards the more **general modeling element**.

#### Example of Enrolment System Use Case showing various relationships

Slide 19

### Included Use Case

**‘Includes**’ or ‘**Uses**’

- Links a use case to another use case that describes **common behaviour**
- A base use case contains an included use case if an **action step** in the base use case calls out the included use cases’ name.
- The included use case describes a lower-level goal than the base use case
- Each of the included, more detailed use cases is a step that the actor or actors might have to perform to achieve the overall goal of the including use case. The arrow should point at the more detailed, included use case.

#### Example of ‘include’ use case

Slide 21

### Generalised Use Case

- '**Generalise**’ or ‘**Inherits**’
  - The general use case generalises the specific one
  - Defines a link between a general and more specific use case
  - The (**specialising**) child should be of a “similar species” to that of the (general) parent.
- A **generalisation relationship** between use case implies that the child contains all the attributes, sequences of behaviour, extension points and relationships defined in the parent.

#### Examples of Generalise or Inherit

Slide 23 - 24

### Extension use case

- ‘**Extends**’
  - Extending/ extension use case extends a base use case by naming the base use case, and defining the **circumstances** under which it **interrupts** the base use case
  - The extending use-case specifies **internal condition** in the base use-case and a **triggering condition**. **If Statement**. the behavior picks up in the base use case where it left off.
  - Links a use case to another use case describing a **variation from standard behavior**
  - Use when the system takes a different behavior
  - The Extensions section in use case narrative defines **alternative paths** through the use case. Often, extensions are used for **error handling**; but extensions are also used to describe **successful secondary paths**

#### Example of extends use case

Slide26 - 27

#### Use Case Diagram: Relationships

Slide 28

### Putting it all together – Steps in Use Case development

1. User Stories (last week)
2. Use Case Diagram
3. Use Case Scenarios or Narrative
4. User Interface or Wireframe or Screenshot

> A User Story can be detailed in terms of 1 or many Use Cases

### User Stories

- **User Story**: 
  - **As a passenger**, I want to **buy a ticket** via Online Ticketing System **so that** I can travel from one city to another city in Australia.
- **Remember** -> A User Story can be detailed in terms of One/many Use Cases. Or many user stories can be detailed in one use case. The relationship depends on a number of factors.
- Based on this User Story you have further **conversations** with the user or proxy user and identify the additional details.

### Use Case Diagram

Slide 31

### Use Case Narratives/Scenarios

- Use Case **Narrative Template** (refer to a separate document available on uts online and understand each section).

> **MUST READ EACH SECTION**.
>
> Follow the template at **Slide 33**

- Detail “**Buy Ticket**” Scenario or Narrative. Refer to a separate document on uts online to see the narrative for Buy Ticket use case.

### Summary of Template

- Use Case Narrative Template (Must refer the template)
  - **Header**: Everything before main flow
  - **Main Flow**: User actions and system responses
  - **Footer**: Everything after main flow
  - **Alternatives**: Alternate path to successful outcomes; successful but secondary paths.
  - **Exceptions**: Main flow fails. A list of things that could go wrong in the main flow, unsuccessful path.

#### Use Case Narratives/Scenarios for “Buy Ticket”

- Now that we have seen the Use Case    Narrative Template, let’s detail “Buy Ticket” Scenario or Narrative. 
- Refer to a separate document on uts online to see the narrative for Buy Ticket use case.

#### Difference between User Stories and Use Cases (homework)

- With so many engineering teams changing from waterfall to Agile Software Development, people often get **caught up** in having a pure Agile process including use of User Stories. So what's all of the hoopla with User Stories? 
  - **What is a User Story**? Simply put, written from the context of the user as a simple statement about their feature need.
  - **How is a User Story different than a Use Case**? While a use case is highly structured and tells a story, the **User Story** sets the stage by **stating the need** before the use case describes the need in detail.
  - **How does the User Story fit into the process**? User Stories are great as an activity in **collecting and prioritizing** the high level features. Getting this initial feedback from the customer is a simple way to identify and prioritise their needs. The User Stories will then morph themselves into the BR and **use cases**.
- **Can I use Use Cases in agile development**? Yes, but keep the use cases lean with less features so that they can be iterated and adapted with each release.
http://www.gatherspace.com/static/use_case_example.html#12

More Differences

- **Purpose**:
  - Use Case: to document an agreement between the **customer** and the **dev Team**.
  - User stories are written to **facilitate release** and **iteration planning**, and serve as placeholders for conversations about the users’ detailed needs.
- **Scope**: Both are sized to **deliver** business value.
  - User stories are kept smaller in scope due to the constraints on their size (such as “no story can be expected to take more than 10 days of development work”) so that they can be used in scheduling work.
  - A use case almost always covers a much larger scope than a story.
- **Completeness**: The text on a story card plus acceptance tests “are basically the same thing as a use case.” This means that the story **corresponds to the use case’s main success scenario**, and that the story’s tests **correspond to the extensions of the use case**.
- **Longevity**: 
  - Use cases are often **permanent artifacts** that continue to exist as long as the product is under active development or maintenance.
  - User stories are not intended to outlive the iteration where they are added to the software. While it’s possible to archive story cards, they are discarded.
http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/articles/advantages-of-user-stories-for-requirements

---

## Assignment Info

- OO Requirement analysis and Specification report
- Same Case study
- Funct and non- funct requirements
  - Funct requirements using
    - User Story map
    - User Stories and Use Cases (narratives)
    - Sequence Diagram
  - Data Requirements
    - Class Diagram
    - State Transistion Diagram
  - Non-Funct requirements
    - User Interface requirements using wireframes
    - Security Requirements
    - Performance requirements