

# Lec 1 Networking

Slides in week 1

## Chapter 1

- [Lec 1 Networking](#lec-1-networking)
  - [Chapter 1](#chapter-1)
    - [Roadmap](#roadmap)
  - [1.1 What is the Internet](#11-what-is-the-internet)
    - [Internet](#internet)
    - [Protocols](#protocols)
  - [1.2 Network Edges](#12-network-edges)
    - [Access Network](#access-network)
  - [Wireless Access Networks](#wireless-access-networks)
    - [Physical Media](#physical-media)
  - [NBN National broadband Network (QnA time)](#nbn-national-broadband-network-qna-time)
  - [1.3 Network Core](#13-network-core)
    - [Packet Switching: Store & Forward](#packet-switching-store--forward)
    - [Packet Switching: Queuing Delay/ Loss](#packet-switching-queuing-delay-loss)
    - [two main functions() of the Network Core](#two-main-functions-of-the-network-core)
    - [Alternative Core: Circuit Switching](#alternative-core-circuit-switching)
  - [Internet Structure: network of networks](#internet-structure-network-of-networks)
  - [Lec1 Summary](#lec1-summary)

### Roadmap

1. Whats the intenet?
2. Network Edge
   - End systems, Acess Network, Links
3. Network Core
   - Packet Switching, Circuit Switching, Network Structure
4. Delays, Loss, Throughput in network
5. Protocol Layers, Service Models
6. Networks under attacks: Security
7. History

## 1.1 What is the Internet

### Internet

Its a network of Billions of Connected devices. Where `hosts(End Systems)` are running `network apps`, connected via `communication links` such as fiber, copper, radio, satellite

- Also considered as a **network of networks** (mobile, home, institutional)
- Data is transmitted through **communication protocols** (http, tcp/ip, 802.11)
- For ease of development, there are **internet standards** such as
  - RFC: request for comments
  - IETF: Internet engineering task force

### Protocols

Defines/controll the **format and order** of messages sent and recieved among different network entities, and **action** taken on message transmission, reciepts

> Request > Response
>
> Human protocols: `transport, trading, agreements, relay races`

## 1.2 Network Edges

- **Network Edges**:
  - Hosts Clients, Server, cloud
  - the user
- **Network Core** Interconnected router, Network of networks

### Access Network

is this a controll network?

- **Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)** : 
  - Use existing **dedicated** telephone line to transmit data at different frequencies (voice, data).
  - Something DSLAM (DSL Acess Multiplexer)
  - Phone & net on the same line.
- **Cable Network**
  - Use Existing TV cable to transfer data in differenct frequency bands(**frequency diversion multiplexing**)
  - `HFC Cable` - Hybrid Fibre Coaxial. Asymetric structure allows 30mbps downstream, 2mbps upstream (download, upload?)
  - `Cable Network` is a network of cables connected to ISP routers
  - Whole street sharing 1 cable, all Homes `shares access network` to the cable header. Then at the **CBTS (cable modem termination syst)**, Fibre would be used to connect to the ISP
- **Home**: Your network at home, consist of *wireless devices*, Wireless Access Point, Router, Firewall (often combined into 1 box)
- **Enterprize (ethernet)** : 
  - Typically Used in Unis, Companies with transmission rates ranges form 10mbps upto 10gbps. 
  - End systems are often connected via ethernet. Access Networks may have dedicated fibre for speed

## Wireless Access Networks

Where end systems connects to a router(acess point) wirelessly. This includes:

- Wireless LAN (WiFi): within a single building(30m), often using the **802.11b/g/n protocol**
- WideArea Wireless Access: provided by telcos(cellular) operators with the range of 10km. 3g - 4g, LTE 

### Physical Media

Lotsa werds

- **bit**: propegate between transmitter/reciever pairs
- **Guided Media**(physical linking cables)
  - `Twisted Pair(TP)`: two insulated copper wire(ethernet), cat5 1gbps, cat6 10gbps
  - `Coaxial Fibre`: two concentric copper conductors, bidirectional, HFC, multiple channes on cable
  - `Fibre Optic Cable`: SUPA FEST, glass fibre carying light pulses, Low impedance
- **Unguided Media**
  - No wires(radio), signal carried in the electromangnetic spectrum
  - prone to physical interferance (obstruction by objects, reflections)
  - `Terestial Microwave`
  - `W-LAN` WiFi
  - `Wide-Area` Cellular network
  - `Satellite`

## NBN National broadband Network (QnA time)

- What Access Technologies used in NBN
- What are the data rate for each Tech
- Cost for each tech?
- Pros and cons

## 1.3 Network Core

- **Mesh**(network) of interconnected routers
- Something `packet switching`:
  - `packets` bundle of data to be transmitted
  - Forward packets from one router to the next, from source to dentination
  - Each packet transmitted at full link capacity

### Packet Switching: Store & Forward

```md
L       Bits per package(pack size)
R       Transfer speed
```

From source to destination: Total time is `L/R` seconds to transfer `L` package into link at `R` speed. (size / speed = delay rate)
**Store and forward** means ALL packages must arrive at router before it can be transmitted to the next link.

Link Transmission Rate == delay rate == bandwidth

> End-end delay = `2L/R` ??
>
> Times taken for a packet to be transmitted from source to destination

### Packet Switching: Queuing Delay/ Loss

`packet delay, loss` occurs when the arrival rate to links exeed the transmission rate of link.

- Queuing delay == wating for all packets to arrive at link
- With multiple connections, packets will queue up & wait to be transmitted.
- Packet can be dropped if the Memory Queue is filled up.
  
### two main functions() of the Network Core

- `Forwarding` Move Packets from router Input to appropriate Router Output
- `Routing`: using routing algo to determine packets destination. (preplan route before forwarding)

> So from source to destination, Routing is used to determine the route, and then forwarded to the next link/destination

**NOTE**: More on ch4

### Alternative Core: Circuit Switching

- End-end resources allocated, reserved for call between a specific source-destination (dedicated route)
- No sharing resources -> no packet loss
- commonly used in traditional Telephone networks( redundant info?)
- **Two types of Circuit Switching**
  - `TDM` Time Division Multiplexing. alocate **timeslot** for each user
  - `FDM` Frequency Division Multiplexing. Individual **frequency** for each user.
- **Packet Switching** v **Circuit Switching**
  - `Packet` More Users, Great for Burtsy data(not constant), Resource Sharing, Simpler less setup. Prone to packetloss, need protocol for congestion cntroll 
  - `Circuit` Better for Audio/Video, No packetLoss

## Internet Structure: network of networks

- End systems connects to the internet via `access ISP` (internet service provider)
- Access ISPs then must be interconnected so 2 hosts from different ISP can connect to eachother
- => **Networks of networks** is very complex (growth is often driven by economical, national policies)

How does Billions of access networks connect to each other 

**Bad** stuff: directly connet each Access network together iz bed

- Each access network to connect ISPs
- Each ISPs must coraborate and connect with each others through **peering links** or a **central switcher/ IXP Internet Exchange point**
- Theres also Regional network for rural Area
- `Content provider` (google amazon) may have their own network

is this core networks?

---

## Lec1 Summary

1. Internet Overview
2. Protocol
3. Network Edge (end systems)
4. Network Core (ISP network)
5. Access Network
6. Packet Switching/ Circuit Switching
7. Internet Structure