# Tutorial

3. Consider an HTTP client that wants to retrieve a Web document at a given URL. The IP address of the HTTP server is initially unknown. What transport and application-layer protocols besides HTTP are needed in this scenario?
   - HTTP client = Browser
   - DNS to get IP
   - UDP for transport
   - TCP for http communication

4. Consider the following string of ASCII characters that were captured by Wireshark when the browser sent an HTTP GET message (i.e., this is the actual content of an HTTP GET message). The characters <cr><lf> are carriage return and line-feed characters (that is, the italized character string <cr> in the text below represents the single carriage-return character that was contained at that point in the HTTP header). Answer the following questions, indicating where in the HTTP GET message below you find the answer.

```md
GET /cs453/index.html HTTP/1.1<cr><lf>
Host: gaia.cs.umass.edu<cr><lf>
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 ( Windows;U; Windows NT 5.1; en-US; rv:1.7.2) Gecko/20040804 Netscape/7.2 (ax) <cr><lf>
Accept:ext/xml, application/xml, application/xhtml+xml, text/html;q=0.9, text/plain;q=0.8, image/png,*/*;q=0.5<cr><lf>
Accept-Language: en-us, en;q=0.5<cr><lf>
Accept-Encoding: zip, deflate<cr><lf>
Accept-Charset: ISO-8859-1, utf-8;q=0.7,*;q=0.7<cr><lf>Keep-Alive: 300<cr><lf>
Connection:keep-alive<cr><lf><cr><lf>
```

- What is the URL of the document requested by the browser?
  - gaia.cs.umass.edu/cs453/index.html
- What version of HTTP is the browser running?
  - HTTP/1.1
- Does the browser request a non-persistent or a persistent connection?
  - Persistent
- What is the IP address of the host on which the browser is running?
- What type of browser initiates this message? Why is the browser type needed in an HTTP request message?
  - Mozilla Firefox, user can have multiple browsers

P5. The text below shows the reply sent from the server in response to the HTTP GET message in the question above. Answer the following questions, indicating where in the message below you find the answer.

```md
HTTP/1.1 200 OK<cr><lf>
Date: Tue, 07 Mar 2008 12:39:45GMT<cr><lf>
Server: Apache/2.0.52 (Fedora) <cr><lf>
Last-Modified: Sat, 10 Dec 2005 18:27:46 GMT<cr><lf>
ETag: ”526c3-f22-a88a4c80”<cr><lf>
Accept-Ranges: bytes<cr><lf>
Content-Length: 3874<cr><lf>
Keep-Alive: timeout=max=100<cr><lf>
Connection: Keep-Alive<cr><lf>
Content-Type: text/html; charset= ISO-8859-1<cr><lf>
<cr><lf>
<!doctype html public ”-//w3c//dtd html 4.0 transitional//en><lf>
<html><lf>
<head><lf> <meta http-equiv=”Content-Type”
content=”text/html; charset=iso-8859-1”><lf> <meta
name=”GENERATOR” content=”Mozilla/4.79 [en] (Windows NT
5.0; U) Netscape]”><lf> <title>CMPSCI 453 / 591 /
NTU-ST550ASpring 2005 homepage</title><lf></head><lf>
<much more document text following here (not shown)>
```

- Was the server able to successfully find the document or not? 
  - Yes 200 response
- What time was the document reply provided?
  - Tue, 07 Mar 2008 12:39:45GMT
- When was the document last modified?
  - Sat, 10 Dec2005 18:27:46 GMT
- How many bytes are there in the document being returned?
  - 3874
- What are the first 5 bytes of the document being returned? Did the server agree to a persistent connection?
  - yes persistant
  - 5 bytes: 

7. Suppose within your Web browser you click on a link to obtain a Web page. The IP address for the associated URL is not cached in your local host, so a DNS lookup is necessary to obtain the IP address. Suppose that n DNS servers are visited before your host receives the IP address from DNS; the successive visits incur an RTT of RTT1,. . .,RTTn. Further suppose that the Web page associated with the link contains exactly one object, consisting of a small amount of HTML text. Let RTT0 denote the RTT between the local host and the server containing the object. Assuming zero transmission time of the object, how much time elapses from when the client clicks on the link until the client receives the object?

8. Referring to Problem P7, suppose the HTML file references eight very small objects on the same server. Neglecting transmission times, how much time elapses with

- Non-persistent HTTP with no parallel TCP connections?
- Non-persistent HTTP with the browser configured for 5 parallel connections?
- HTTP?

