## Week 6

# C3 Transport Layer

## Outline

- 3.5 Connection Oriented Transport: TCP
  - Segment Struvture
  - Reliable Data Transfer
  - Flow Control
  - Connection Management
- 3.6 Principle of Congestion Controll
- 3.7 TCP Congestion Controll


## Connection Oriented Transport TCP

Lets return to the **Transmission Controll Protocol**, connection-oriented, reliable transport protocol. TCP is defined in **RFCs list**: 793,1122,1323, 2018, 2581

## TCP is ___ becacause

- **connection-oriented**: handshaking (exchange of control msgs) between sender, reciever **before** data exchange. S/R must exchange a preliminary segment to establish the connection parameters.
- **Ponint-to-point**: Data is sent between One S and One R. Connection happens between **end systems**. The imediate network elements only see datagrams and are oblivious to the connection. One Client, One Server & the client **always** initiate the connection
- **full-duplex service**: bi-directional data flow in same connection at the same time, MSS: maximum segment size
- **flow controlled**: sender will not overwhelm receiver
- **Reliable**, in order Byte steam: no "message" boundaries.
- **Pipelined**: TCP congestion controll set window size.

### TCP segment structure

TCP Connection-establishment procedure **Three-Way Handshake**

- Client will send a segment containing no payload
- Server will respond with a special segment to Client
- Client will then respond with a third segment to Establish connection
- First 2 segment carry no payload, 3rd might
- After this the application prcesses can send data to each other.


SO **MSS**/ MaximumSegmentSize, sets the max size of how large the segments can be. The **MSS** is only the max size of AppsLayer data per segment, without including the header data.

**TCP** pairs each chunk of client data with a TCP Header > forming TCP Segments. Then its passed down to the NetworkLayer tobe Encapsulated withinin NetworkLayer IP Datagrams to be sent

- TCP Segment Structure - Slide 4 Transport 3-4
- TCP: seq. ACKs - one way: AB S5 transport 3-5
- TCP: seq. Nr, ACK - bidirectional s6 transport 3-6
- TCP seq. numbers, ACKs s7 transport 3-7

### 3.3 TCP flow control

- **Flow Controll**: Reciever controlls the flow of data from sender, Therefore, preventing the overflow of the buffer(by transmitiing too much data toofast). Prevent Loss of Data
- **Receiver** “advertises” empty buffer space by including **rwnd** value in TCP header of R-to-S segments.
  - **RcvBuffer** size is set via **socket** options (default is 4096 B)
  - many OS auto adjust **RcvBuffer**
- Sender limits amount of **unacked** (“in-flight”) data to receiver’s **rwnd** value.
- This is to guarantees receive buffer will **not overflow**.

### TCP window flow control

### TCP seq. numbers, ACKs

- **sequence numbers**: byte stream “number” of first byte in segment’s data
- **acknowledgements**: seq # of next byte expected from other side, cumulative ACK

> **Q**: how R handles out-of-order segments
>
> **A**: TCP spec doesn’t say, depends on the implimentation.

### 3.2 TCP Reliable Data Trasnfer **rdt**

- TCP creates **rdt** service on top of IP’s unreliable service
  - **pipelined** segments
  - cumulative **ACKs**
  - single retransmission timer
- retransmissions are triggered by timed-out transmissions & duplicated ACKs.

### TCP RountTripTime rt and timeouts

> Q: How long should timeout of TCP be?
> 
> A: longer than RTT, but RTT can varries.
> 
> - If too **short** => premature timeout, unnecessary retransmissions
> - If too **long**: slow reaction to segment loss

**Theoretically**: `TCP throughput = rwnd / RTT`

> Q: How to estimate RTT
>
> - **SampleRTT**: Measured time from segment transmission untill ACK is recieved. (Retransmission is ignored)
> - **SampleRTT** will vary, estimated RTT needs to be "smooth"
>   - Done by averaging several recent measurements, not just a single **sampleRTT**

### TCP round trip time, timeout

`EstimatedRTT = (1-a)*EstimatedRTT + a*SampleRTT`

- exponential weighted moving average
- influence of past sample decreases exponentially fast
- typical val of a = 0.125

- **timeout interval**: `EstimatedRTT` + “safety margin
  - large variation in `EstimatedRTT` -> larger safety margin
- **estimate SampleRTT** deviation from `EstimatedRTT`:
  - `DevRTT = (1 - b)*DevRTT +b*|SampleRTT - EstimatedRTT|`
  - b = 0.25
- `TimeoutInterval = EstimatedRTT + 4(DevRTT)` (devrtt = sagety margins)

## TCP sender events:

- data recieved from app:
  - create segment with seq number
  - seq # = **byte-stream number** of first data byte in  segment
  - start timer if not already running
    - think of timer as for oldest un**ACK**ed segment
    - expiration interval: `TimeOutInterval`
- **Timeout**: retransmit segment that causes timeout & restart the timer
- **ACK recieved**: 
  - If ACK acknowledged previously unACKed sengments
    - Update what is known to be ACKed
    - Start timer if there are still unacked segments

### TCP Fast Retransmit

> **TCP Fast Retransmit**
>
> If sender recieves 3 ACKs for the same data, Sender resends unACKed segment with smallest sequence

- The timeout period is relatively long before resending lost packets
- Lost packets are detected after dupplicating ACKs
  - Senders often send many back2back segments
  - If the Segment is lost, there may be many duplicated acks.
  - Likely that unacked lost segments dont wait for timeout.

## Connection Management

So Basic TCP: sender/receiver “handshake” before exchanging data,  agree to establish connection & **connection parameters** 

### Agreeing to establish a connection

> Q: will 2-way handshake always work in network?
>
> Not always, there could be unreliable channels &
retransmitted messages (e.g. req_conn(x)) due to loss

- 2 way handshake failure scenarios. see 27
- TCP 3-way handshake see 28
  
### TCP: closing a connection

- client, server each close their side of connection, send TCP segment with FIN = 1
- respond to received FIN with ACK
  - on receiving FIN, ACK can be combined with own FIN
- simultaneous FIN exchanges can be handled

## Principles of congestion control

- **congestion**:
  - informally: “too many sources sending too much data too fast for the network to handle”
  - different from flow control!
- **manifestations**:
  - long delays (queueing)
  - lost packets (overflow)
- Top-10 problem for networking

### Causes/costs of congestion: scenario 1

s33

### TCP Slow Start

- Connection begins with a low rate and its increased exponentially until the first loss event occurs:
- initially cwnd = 1 MSS
- double cwnd every RTT
- done by incrementing cwnd by 1 MSS (linear) for every ACK received

### TCP: switching from slow start to CA

> Q: when should the exponential increase switch to linear?
>
> A: when cwnd gets to 1/2 of its value before timeout.

- **Implementation**: variable **ssthresh**, and on loss event **ssthresh** is set to half of **cwnd** before loss

### TCP congestion control: additive increase multiplicative decrease

- **Approach**: sender gradually increases transmission rate, probing for usable bandwith untill loss occur
  - **Additive Increase**: increase **cwnd** by 1 MSS every RTT until loss is detcted
  - **Multiplicative Decrease**: cut **cwnd** in half after loss.

### TCP Congestion Control: details

- **sender limits transmission**: cwnd is dynamic, function of perceived network congestion `wtf`
- TCP Sending Rate: sends **cwdn** bytes & wait for RTT ACKs then sends more bytes

`rate roughly = cwdn/RTT bytes/sec`

### TCP throughput

- avg. TCP throughput as function of window size, RTT? `wtf`
  - ignore slow start, assume always data to send
- **W**: window size (measured in bytes) where loss occurs
  - avg. window size (# in-flight bytes) is ¾ W
  - avg. throughput is 3/4W per RTT
  - `avg TCP throughput = 3/4(w/RTT) bytes/sec

## Chapter 3: summary

- principles behind transport layer services:
  - multiplexing, demultiplexing
  - reliable data transfer
  - flow control
  - congestion control
- instantiation, implementation in the Internet
  - UDP
  - TCP

## Next

- leaving the network "edge" (apps, transport layer)
- into the network "core"
- 2 network layer chapters.
  - Data plane
  - Control plane
