# Introduction to Information Security

## [__In-depth__](../lec1.md)

lets start with simple revision from the notes

## Difference between data, informationa and knowledge.

- __data__: raw, unorganised data that need to be processed and organized to convay any specific meaning. Data have no context.
- __information__: Processed, organized and structured data that have meaning and value to recipent. Data converted into meaningful context.
- __knowledge__: processed and organized data to used to convey understanding anc accumulated learning.

## Information alone _cannnot help solving problems_, __knowledge__ is also required to address issues

## Information Systems/ Information Technology

__Information system (IS)__: A set of interrelated components that collect/ recieves data/information process, analyze, organize, store and distribute information for a specific purpose. Fundamentals components of computer-based IS:

- Hardware
- Software
- Data/Database
- Network
- Procedures
- People

__Information Technology (IT)__: Hardware, software, Network Database that support Information Processing. IT is part of IS

## __3 activities__ in IS to produce information that organnizations need to make decisions, controll operations, analyze problems, and create new product/services

- __Input__: entering raw captured data from both within the organization or the external environment.
- __Processing__: Conversion of raw input into meaningful form (data -> information)
- __Output__: Output the processed information to to support specific activities.

`Examples: hotel reservation information system`

- Input: consist of order data for reservation(Name, address, payment detail, room information, key dates)
- Process: calculate order fees, track reserved rooms, track purchases, send payment request to bank.
- Output can be order confirmation printout or email, order reciepts. The System can also provide meaningful Information such as total room booked per year or repeated customers.

---

## Major Capabilities of Information System

- perform high-speed, high-volumn numerical computations
- provide fast communications, collaborations and adress rapidly changing customer's requirements
- Store large amounts of information
- Allow quick inexpensive access to large amount of information
- Automate business processes / manual tasks and improve operational efficiency.

## IS facilitace and support:

- Operational excellence
- Inventory management
- New product, services
- Custeomer and supplier Intimacy
- Improved decision making
- Competitive advantage

## There should be a tight intergration of IT function with strategy, mission and goals of the organization

## [__Index__](../index.md)
