# Data and Knowledge management

Effective Information System is needed to stay ahead of the competition

__An effective Information__ system provides users with accurate, timeley and relevant information

Organizations which don't have timely, accurate or relevant information because the __data__ is _poorly organized and manage_.

## What makes data management difficult

- The amount of data in increasing exponentially
- Data are scattered and collected by many individuals using different method and devices
- Data comes from many sources
- Data Rot (Outdated, Destroyed/ damanged storage media)
- Inconsistent, Conflicting data due to non-intergrated Information System.

### Managing data is very important

__Data Governance__ Is to ensure established data standards and policies are defined and enforced across the whole organizations.

---

## Database

### Problems with the tradditional file enviromnent

- __Data redundancy__: same data stored in many places
- __Data Inconsistnecy__: copies of data do not agree
- __Poor Security__: little controll or management of data, access and dissemination of information may be out of control
- __Poor sharing and availability__: Pieces of data are in different files and parts of the organizations cannot be related to one another.

### __Databases__ are used to address above problems

- Its a collection of data organized by centralizing and controlling data.
- Its a collection of related __attributes__ about an __entity__
  - __attribute__: `for a person e.g` name, age, gender
  - __entity__: someting you collect data about. Each record contains many attributes.

__Database Management System(DBMS)__: software that permit organizations to centralize data, efficiently manage and provide acess to stored data by application program.

## Advantages

|Advantages| Description|
|---|---|
|__Minimal data Redundancy__|Single copy of data ensues storage requirements are mimimized|
|__Improved data Consistency__|Eliminating redundancy reduces posibility of redundancy|
|__Increased Security__| Easier to enforce access restrictions due to a centralized system|
|__Improved data Quality__|Centralized controll, Minimized redundancy, improved data consistency help to enhance data quality|
|__Improved data accessibility and sharing__|Centralization simplify deployment and access controll for personal within/outside of organizational boundaries|
|__Enforcement of standards__|Centralization simplifies the enforcement of standards and rules in data CRUD functions|
|__Program-data independance__|Much easier to alter software according to changing business needs. (decoupling design)|
|__Increased productivity of application development__|Datastandrds make it easier to build and modify applications|
|__Reduced program Maintenance__|Data changed in the central DB is replicated seamlessly throughout all applications|

---

## Data Heirachy

- __bit__ smallest process unit (0 and 1).
- __byte__ single character, letter number, symbol
- __field__ logical grouping of characters into word or small group of word
- __record__ logical grouping of related fields `e.g` student name
- __file__ logical grouping of related record

## [__Index__](../index.md)