# Ethics, Privacy

__Ethics:__ The principles of right and wrong that individuals use to make choices that guide their behaviour.

## Ethical frameworks

Are often used to make an ethical decision

- __Utilitarian Approach__: the approach that provide the most good and does the least harm. Based on this approach, ethical corporate action would be the ones that produce the least harm to all affected parties - customers, employers, shareholders, business partners, the community and the environment
- __Rights Approach__: maintains that an ethical action is the one that best protects and respects the moral rights of the affected parties (even competitors)
- __Common Good Approach__: An ethical actions is the one that best serves the community as whole and not just some members.

---

## Steps for making an ethical decisions

1. recognise the issues
1. Get the facts
1. Evaluate the alternatives
1. Make the choice
1. Reflect your decisions

__Code of Ethics__: Collection of principles that are inteded to guide decision making by member of an organization.

> ACS code of ethics.
>
> Many organizations develp their own code of ethics and that different code of ethics are not always consistent with one another.
---

## Fundamental __Tenets of Ethics__

__Information Privacy__ refers to the right to determine when and to what extent, Information about you can be gathered and/or communicated to others

NOTE: Improvement ion Information technologies such as big data analysis have generated a new set of ethical problems such as privacy issues.

|Trend|Impact|
|---|---|
|Computing Power doubles everty 18 months|More Organizaations depend on Computer systems for critical decisions and become more vulnerable to system failures|
|Data Storage Cost rapidly decline|Its easier to maintain detailed databases on individuals. The type of information colelcted is limitless|
|Data Analysis advances|Vast quantities of data gathered care analyze to develop detailed profiles of individual behaviours|
|Network Advances|Cost of moving data and making it accessible falls exponentially. Access of data become more difficult to control|
|Mobile device Growth Impact|Individual mobile phones can be tracked without user consent or knowledge|

---

## Categories of Ethical issues related to IT

- Privacy issues involving the collection, storage and dissimination of information about individuals
- Accuracy issues relating to the authenticity, fidelity and correctness of information thast is colelcted and processed.
- Property issues involves the ownership and value of colelcted and processed information
- Accessibility issues involve to who should have access to collected and processed information and whether a fee should be paid for this access

## IT related threats to privacy

- __Electronic Surveillance__
- __Personal data in DB__ 
- __Information on internet Bullein board, Newsgroup and social networking sites__

---

## Privacy policies/ Privacy codes

These are guidelines for protecting the privacy of an organisation's customers, clients and employees. There are different models:

- __Opt-Out model of informed consent__: permits the organization to collect data untill the customer specifically request otherwise
- __Opt-in model of informedd consent__: Prohibits data collection unless the customer authorizes it

## The Privacy acts

Allows you to:

- Know why your information is collected, how will it be used and who would it be disclosed to
- Ask for access to your records
- Stop recieving unwanted directed marketing material
- Correct inaccurate information about you
- Make a complaint about an agency or organisation, if you think they might have mishandled your personal information.

---

## Extras

- Ongoung surveilance can outweigh the presimption of privacy as long as the employer is aware of the legal implications of privacy
- If emplyers want to conduct e-surveilance, they should develop and impliment privacy polices. Let emplyees to read the polives and give their informed consent to this surveilance.
- The emplyer should explain the location of surveilance device. If they monotored emplyees share recorded result, explain how long and where are they the result is held.

## [__Index__](../index.md)