# Ch1?

Let see that the text book have. 4 parts
- Context
- Analysis
- Design
- Implementation
- advance topic(bleh)

I think i need topic 2 - 4

## Ch1 Context

### Words

- **Data**: stored rep of objects & events that has meaning/ importance in the users environment. Data itself is useless by itself without context.
- **Informations**: processed data
- **database**: logically collection of data.
- **Metadata**: data that describe properties/chars of raw data. Giving raw data context(name, age, height, weight, data type, description)
- **data model**: graphical system (in design) that is used to record the relationships among data. used to show abstraction while designing a db
- **entity**: basicly a table. Describes how information is retained.
- **Attribute**: specific information that is captured in ann entity(name, age are attributes of a person)
- **relationships**: relationship between entities in a db
- **dbms**: casual mode
- **Enterprize Data modeling**: to scope the general contents of the specification for an organisation


 data warehouse, schema(3-schema architecture), relational Db, enterprise resource planning(erp), db application, data independence, repository, userview, SDLC, agile, conceptual schema, logical schema.

### Ch1 Learning objective

- limitations of conventional file processing systems.
- advantages of db comparing to tradditional
- cost & risk of db
- 9 components of a typical db environment
- 4 categories of application that uses db
- life cycle of a SDLC emphasizing on the purpose of db analysis, design and implementation activities
- roles who design, implement, use and administer db
- differences btween external, coceptual and internal schemas.
- Reason for 3 schema db

### Traditional file systems

Pc has to store, manipulate data manually (manual data entry from paper?). Tis bad because:

> older systems are often built as requested. There fore it might be rather difficult to scale and share resources between different deppartments(orders/accounting/payroll)

this often results in:

- program data dependance(locked in a specific program, hard to scale up)
  - any change to the structure might break the program
- Duplication of Data
  - inconsistent, unreliable & duplication of the same data in each department
  - DRY - dont repeat yourself
  - waste of resource
- Limited data sharing
- long dev time
- program maintenance cost (time, resources)

### Advantages of Db

- Program-data independance: achieve the separation of concern design. Making it easier to build & manage programs that will interact with the database
- Planned data redundancy: well structured db would not neccecarily redundancy, but it enables the desiner to controll the type/amount of redundant data
- Improved Consistency: prevent repitation,conflicting of existing data
- Improved sharing: let organisation have a better controll of who is authorized to access the data
- Enforcement of standards: have a common naming convention, rules of how db is controlled and accessed, can help organisations scale better in the longterm.
- better accesibility: through queries, user can better control and access specific data in the db
- Reduced Program maintenance
- improve decision support: better data = better management decisions


#### Cost and risks of db

- New specialized personel: to develop and train employees on how to use the db initially and on a regular basis to constantly keep up with the update.
- Instalation/management cost: in implementing and upgrading to apporpriate systems
- Conversion Cost: lol
- Backup & recovery: in case of failure
- Organizational conglict: in defining data definitions, data ownership and maintenance

#### Components of the database environment

1. Data Modeling & design tools: automated tools to design db and applications progs
2. Repository: centralized knowledge base for data definitions, data relationships and systemj components
3. DBMS for dumdums
4. Database: organized collection of logically related data
5. Application Program" duh
6. UI: casuals uses ui
7. Data & db administratiors: responsible in the overal management of the data resources in the organisation. Both in the physical db designs & managing techical issues in te db env
8. Systems dev: me
9. End users: lol

#### DB development process

Often begins with **Enterprize data modeling**, which is a top-down approach in information systems planning & development


#### DB in SDLC

##### Planning

- Enterprise Modeling: review existing current db / requirements. Describe general terms, data needed for each information system under consideration for development. Determine whats need to be added, created
- Conceptual Data Modeling: Analyzes requirements for the Information system

##### Analysis

- Conceptual data modeling

##### Design

- logical Db design
- physical db design and definition

##### Implementation

- db implementation

##### management

- db maintenance

#### 3-Schema architecture

Defined by ANSI, Chapter 2 of book

1. **External Schema**: view of end users( employees managers)
2. **Conceptual Schema**: Combines different external views into a single, coherent, and comprehensive diffinition of enterprize data. View for the data architech/ data admin
3. **Internal Schema**: 2 seperate schema
   - Physical: how data is represented and stored in secondaty storages
   - Logical: rep of datatypes of db tech(relational)