# Intro to Software Architecture

- Theres some books look it at your time - Intro to SWA uts 2018 youtube
- Confrerences [infoq](www.infoq.com)

## What is an architecture

- Common definition
  - SWA of a program or computing system is the structure(s) of the system, which comprise software elemets, the externally visible props of those elements and their relationship
  - fundamental orgazination of a system embodied in its components, their relationship to each other and to the enviroment, and the principles guiding its design and evolution.
  - solid description for completed systems hard to use to build one
  - **Architecture** is presented to enable/support the activities within it `cool`
- Challanges for architecture is not how it will function. Its how it responses to stress, exeptions and changes
- Not a passive element of the system but the **STRUCTURE** that enables the system to function.

### Structural elemets of a system

- Architecture is an abstraction(and different levels) of the system
  - Libraries, packages, moduels
- Difference btween architecture and design is **SCALE**
  - Architecture conterns structure
  - Design does not always concern structure
- Architecture of
  - Building: wall stairs doors columns, pumbling, electronics
  - Computing system: Systems/subsystems, interface btwen systems, communication protocol

### Summary What is

- Basic definition
- Not everything has an architecture
- Architecture is concerned with structural elements of a system, their externally observable props and their relationships btween them, but its purpose is to support the system participation in the work around it.

---

## Why is Architecture Important

### It allow us to explore the problem

- Big Problem, Many current systems are developed to support poorly understood problems
  - Its vital to correctly develop a sound architecture as its more costly to implement the actual system
  - Modelling is good, allows us to understand the system's capabilities

### Modelling

- Allow communication with stakeholders.

### Its a transferavble abstraction of a system

- Can be implemented in other similar areas
- Last a long time.
- Replacing is very costly

### But its limited by the context

- It must Satisgy its Objectices
- Its limited by its constrain:
  - Knowledge of the problems and possible solutions
  - legacy systems and decisions
  - time/ budget
  - modelling langyage
  - avaliable technology for the solution.

### It limits what can and cant be done

- hard to alter architectural constrains once they are in place
  - Max size of a record
  - max number of records that can be processed
  - man num of users can be supported
  - ease of maintenance and modification
  - security
- e.g
  - loosy v tightly coupled components
  - specific connections btween components instead of flexible interfaces like message bus or facade

### architecture determine characteristis of the system

- functionality can be changed
- performance, responsiveness, security mostly determined by architecture
- high performance systems are difficult to maintain
- easily maintained/ modified hard to speed up
- secure systems are hard to access(vise versa)

### Summary importance

- long lasting
- boundary objects btween customer and developers
- one more

---

## Why is Architecture hard

- no right answer
- comes at different levels of abstraction.
- qualities must be traded off with eachother (speed, maintainability, secure, accessibility)
- hard to figgure/remember all of its interactions ( too many aspect to keep in mind at once)
- architecures concern systems, will have emergent propertis
  - unexpected interactions
  - not a simple product

### Emergent properites

- Behavorial or characteristics of the system that arises on the interactions of the elements
- most non functional props are emergent (and oftem are unexpected or unintended)
  - Most are prepared for direct (1st order) reasoning
  - Not as preperaed for 2nd/3rd order effect
- Can be learnt to prepared against with experience.

### Summary Difficulty

- There is alot to consider when developing an architecture.
- Its hard mainly you are dealing with systems that has emergent properties
- But you can learn to deal with them better with practice(expeirence)

---

## What makes a good architech

- A Good Architech can conceptualize solutions at different levels of abstractions. And not mix them up
- by organizing solutions into discrete levels, architechs are able to focus on a single aspect of the solutions while ignoreing all remaining complexities

### Coding rush

- Devs know solutions should be decomposed into levels of abstraction. However this is very difficult to apply in practice on actual projects. **VERY HARD**
- upon encountering the first hurdle, its easy to **abbandon the abstraction** and be a hack/ rush to code.
- Discipline. Plan carefully before jumping in

### Layers of abstraction

- Sys designers model computer system using levels of abstraction
- Each level is well defined and provides a distict perspective of the system.
- Many syst designed at 3 primary level: System, Subsystem and components

#### Simple Framework: 4 levels of abstraction

- Domain
  - Highest Level of abstracion, only cover the external func of the system must provide (black box)
- Business Process
  - Static view of the domain level, models the class structure and their relationships of objects witness in the usecase
- Logical
  - Logical level zooms inside the system, Exposing highlevel designs of the ssystem. Architech selects the tech and define High level syst structure.
- Physical
  - Captures the structures of the system implimentation.

> One of many way you can look at abstraction of a system
>
> There is also objects, aggregated objects become components,aggregated components become subsyst.

### Summary Skills

- Too many devs rushing into programming
- Need to spend some time and think about the layers of abstraction (4 layers system)

---

## Challanges of Architecture

- Now Typical systems are getting bigger and more complex, and less well known, understood.
- Increasing need to encooperate legacy systems or packaged system ( rare to build independant systems) (could be neglected in phone apps)
- Trend towards systems encooporatin loosly coupled components, many from external providers (hard to keep track of)
- **Product line architecture**??
  - fairly new.

### Modelling more complex problems

- Orgs tackle less well understood and less well ordered problem, there is greater need to dev good models.
- Becomming too expensive to experiment on the real world
  - Solutions are tried on models then real world
  - Need skills in model development.
