## Week 8 Lecture notes

# Network Layer: Control Plane

## Outline

- 5.1 introduction
- 5.2 routing protocols: 
  - link state
  - distance vector
- 5.3 intra-AS routing in the Internet: OSPF
- 5.4 routing among the ISPs: BGP
- 5.6 ICMP: The Internet Control Message Protocol
- 5.7 Network management and SNMP

---

## 1.Intro - Network-layer functions

\* **RECALL**: 2 network layer functions

- In the **DATA plane**: `forwarding()`: move packets from router’s input to appropriate router output
- In the **Control Plane**: `routing()`: determine route teken by packets form source to destination.

## 2. Routing protocols

**Routing protocol goal**: determine “good” paths/ routes, from Sending to receiving Host.

- **path**: sequence of routers packets will traverse in going from given initial source host to given final destination host
- **Good Routing features**: "shortest", "fastest", "least congested" and "cheapest"
- routing: a “top-10” networking challenge

### Graph Abstraction of network

- Graph: `G = (N,E)` where"
- N = an array of routers
- E = an array notating links(router tuples) of the router 

### Graph abstraction: costs

- Cost of link notation: `c(a,b) = 5`
- Means the cost of link between router a and b is 5
  - often related to distance/ delay
  - (inversely) related to bandwith and congestion.

**Question**: What is the cheapest path between a and b?
- depends on the algorithm


### Routing algorithm classification

**Question**: global or decentralized information? `wtf`

- **global** or **centralized**:
  - all routers have complete topology, link cost info
  - “link state” algorithms
- **decentralized** or **distributed**: 
  - router knows physically-connected neighbors, link costs to neighbors `wtf`
iterative process of computation, exchange of info with neighbors
  - “distance vector” algorithms

**Question** Static or Dynamic?
- **Static**:
  - routes change slowly over time. `thats not what static means`
- **Dynamic**
  - routes change more quickly due to:
  - periodicly due to algorithm update
  - in response to link cost changes

### A link-state routing algorithm

```md
Centralized routing algorithm with Global network topology information
--- Dijkstra’s algorithm
```
- net topology, link costs known to all nodes
  - accomplished via “link state broadcast” 
  - all nodes have same info
- computes least cost paths from one node (‘source”) to all other nodes, gives **forwarding table** for that node.
- **iterative**: after k iterations, know least cost path to k destinations.

#### Dijsktra’s algorithm: example

**NOTE** see slide 11 - 12

#### Dijkstra’s algorithm: example (2) 

### Dijktra's algorithm

1. Initialization
2. `N' = {u}
3. for all nodes v
4. if v adjacent to u
5. then D(v) - c(u,v)
6. else D(v) = infinite
7. 
8. **Loop**
9. Find w not in N' such that D(w) is a minimum
10. add w to N'
11. update D(v) for all adjacent to w and not in N':
12. `D(v) = min ( D(v), D(w) + c(w,v))`
13. // new cost to v is either old cost to v or known shortest path cost to w plus cost from w-v.
14. **Until all nodes in N'**

#### Dijkstra's algorithm: another example

Slide 14

#### Dijkstra's algorithm: another example (2)

Slide 15

`Dijkstra’s algorithm, discussion` Optional slide 16


### Distance vector algorithm

- **Decentralized** routing algorithm:
  - no global topology info
  - Only neighbouring info
  - Rely on neighbour's route to destination
- E.g Syd - Brisbane:
  - Use what route & how far it is: Ask neighbouring links:
    - via Newcastle     - 200 + 800    = 1000km
    - via Orange        - 300 + 1000   = 1300km
    - via Goulbourn     - 200 + 1200   = 1400km
    - via Wollonggong   - 100 + 1100   = 1200km

#### **Bellman-Ford equation** (dynamic programming)

```md
Slide 19 for more info

let
   dx(y) := cost of least-cost path from x to y
then
   dx(y) = min {c(x,v) + dv(y) }
```

#### Bellman-Ford example: u -> z

Slide 20

### Distance vector algorithm (2)

- `Dx(y)` = estimate of least cost from x to y
  - x maintains  distance vector `Dx = [Dx(y): y є N ]`
- node x:
  - knows cost to each neighbor v: c(x,v)
  - maintains its neighbors’ distance vectors. For each neighbor v, x maintains
  - `Dv = [Dv(y): y є N ]`

- **key idea**:
  - from time-to-time, each node sends its own distance vector estimate to neighbors
  - when x receives new DV estimate from neighbor, it updates its own DV using B-F equation:
  - `Dx(y) <- minv{ c(x,v) + Dv(y)} for each node`
  - `y є N`

**Distance** vector algorithm is:

- **iterative**, **asynchronous**: each local iteration caused by: 
  - local link cost change
  - DV update message from neighbor
- **distributed**:
  - each node notifies neighbors only when its DV changes
  - neighbors then notify their neighbors if necessary
- **Each node** will loop these steps:
  1. **wait** for change in local link cost/ or neighbour message
  2. **recompute** estimates
  3. if DV to any destination has changed, **notify** neighbours

`Optional see 24 - 25`

#### Distance Vector: Link cost changes

- when a node detects local **link cost change**
- routing info is updated, and recalculate the **Distance Vector**
- if Distance Vector changes, neighbours will be notified
- " good news travels fast"

different scenario

- Nodes detects local link cost change
- `bad news travels slow` - count to infinity problem
- goes through multiple iterations before algorithm stablizes: "read txtbook wtf"

**Soliution**:

- if Z routes through Y to get to X:
  - Z tells Y iys (Z's) distance to X is infinite (so Y won't route to X via Z)
- But will this completely solve count to infinity problem?

### Comparison of LS and DV algorithms

- **message complexity**
  - LS: with n nodes, E links, O(nE) msgs sent  
  - DV: exchange between neighbors only (convergence time varies)
- speed of convergence
  - LS: O(n^2) algorithm requires O(nE) msgs (may have oscillations)
  - DV: convergence time varies
    - may be routing loops
    - count-to-infinity problem
- **Robustness**: in case of router malfunctioning:
  - LS: nodes may advertise incorrect **link cost** and each node computes only its own table.
  - DV: can advertise inccorect path cost. Each node's table used by others - error may propagate through network
 
## Summary

- approaches to network control plane per-router control (traditional)
- Link State: Dijkstra's Algos
- Distance