# Telecommunications and Networking

## Outline

1. Computer Network
1. Types of Network
1. Network Applications

---

## What is a computer network

- A collection of computing devices which are connected in various ways to _communicate_ and _share resourses_
- Can be both wired and wireless (through radio waves or infrared signals).
- can range from 2 pc to the the largest network of all, the internet.

---

## Local Area Network (LAN)

- a net work that resides in a limited geographic area.
- connected pc in a school, office building
- There are many different kind on networks.
- designed to connect computers and other devices within a 500m radius.
- LAN is also used to linked long distance Wide Area Network(WAN)

---

## Network Components

- __Network Interface Device__
  - Link PC to network
  - the connection medium can be a telephone wirem coxial cable, or radio signal in the case of cellphone and wireless LAN (wifi networks).
- __Network operating system(NOS)__
  - routes and manges communications on the network and coordinate network resources
  - can be present in any pc in the network or just on the dedicaated sertver pc itself.
  - A server comp performs important network func for client pc, E.g serving up webpages, storing data, and storing network OS.
  - Such as MS window server, Linux , Novell OpenEnterprise Server...
- __Hubs__
  - Most network contain a switch or hub act as connection point btween comps
  - _Hubs_ are Simple devices that connect network components sending a packet of data to all connected devices
  - _switches_ are more intelligent hubs can also filter what is sent where.
- __Router__
  - Communications processors that routs packets of data through different networks, ensuring that data sent arrive at the correct address.
- __Software-Defined Networking (SDN)__ is a new networking approach which these controll funtions are managed by 1 central prog, which can run on inexpensivce commodity servers that are seperate from network devices themselves.


Multiple PCs <=> Switch <=> Router <=> Other networks

Switch <=> Server(NOS)

---

## Metropolitian Area Network (MAN)

- A network that spans a metro area, A city and its major suburbs, Its geograpgic scope falls between a WAN and a LAN

---

## Wide Area Network (WAN)

- Spans broad geographical distances , Entire Regions, states, continents, or the entire globe.
- The internet is a WAN.
- PC Connects to WAN through public networks, such as the telephone system or private calbe syst or Leased lines or satellites.
- Uni cannot run wires to connect pc in different cities . Instead Uni contracts with a communicaiton vendor that is licenced by Gov and already has its authority to run new lines betwwn cities.

---

## Transmission Media

| Transmission media Descriptrion | speed |
|---|---|
|__Twisted-pair Wire__: Strands of copper wire twisted in pairs covered with a plastic sheath | 10 - 100 mbps|
|__Coaxial cable__: Thick insulated copperwire, less subjected to interfernce | upto 1 Gbps|
|__Fiber-Optic cable__: strand of glass fibre, transmitting data as pulses of light generated by lazers| 15mbps - 6 Tbps|
|__Wireless__: based on radio signals of various freq. used for long distance ,wireless communications and internet acess| Upto 600mbps|

### Pros and cons

|Method| Pros| Cons|
|--|--|--|
|Twisted Pair|Cheap, easily availible and to rok with| slow, low security, interference|
|Coaxial| HigherBandwith, LEss interference| Expensive, low security, hard to work with|
|Fibre-Optic|BERY HIGH bandwith, kinda cheap, hard to tao| Hard to work with(Splice)|

---

## Whats the internet

- World most extensive, public communication system
- Most people connect to the Internet by subscribing to an Internet Service Provider(ISP).
- Every PC on the Internet is a ssinged with a unique Internet Protocoll (IP) address.
- IP - 32- bit number, 4 string of number ranginf from 0-225
- ATM, there are 2 IP addressing schemes:
  - IPv4 - most popular consist of 32 bit, it was developed in the time there was not many computers.
  - now IPv6 - 128 bit(JEESUS)

---

## Services for ISP internet connections

- __Digital Subsciber Line (DSL)__ tech operates on existing telephone line to carry data.
- __Cable Internet Conenctions__ provided by calbe tb vendors, Use cable coaxial lines.
- __T1 and T3__ are International telephone standard for difital communications. Mostly are leased/dedicated for business or gov agencies as it guaranteed highspeed.

---

## Addresses on the Internet and other Misc features

- __Domain name Systems (DNS)__ Easy to remember names for some IP address (the end of URLS .com .edu .au)

- __Intranet__ Interner corporate networks based on Internet Technology e.g [FEIT Student Intranet](https://my.feit.uts.edu.au/)
- __Extranet__ Private Intranet extends to authorized users outside of the org e.g [UTS: Inserarch student Extranet](https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&&rct=j&&q=&&esrc=s&&source=web&&cd=1&&cad=rja&&uact=8&&ved=0ahUKEwjqhezl0L_WAhVLHpQKHYXjAPUQFggmMAA&&url=https://student.insearch.edu.au/&&usg=AFQjCNG2f11-pXYFnJCYXaAApAmRy9KkFg)
- __Virtual Private network(VPN)__
  - secure, private, encrypted network whis is configured withthin a public network.
  - enable authorized users to send and recieve data across shared or public network.

---

## How do Organizations use network to improve their operations.

__Network can support:__

- __discovery__
  - Enables users to search and access data sources in allsort of topic ares. Using search engines and portasl
- __Communication__
  - using communication tech such as email, Web-based call centers, and Electronic char rooms.
  - Email and Instant Messaging(IM)
  - Web-based call centers - personalized customer suport
- __Collaboration__
  - Allow users to work together
  - Google Docs: a web based word processor enable multiple users to work on the same doccument at the same time
  - SharePoint: broser based collaboration and document management platform
- __Distance learning and E-Learning__
  - Distant Learing: teachers and student does not need to meet face-to-face. Very benefitial for remote students.
  - E-Learning: Learnign supported by the web, where students will work during class. The course work is online. Very flexible.
- __Telecommuting (working from home)__
  - For Highly prized workers to work anywhere and anytime. `digital nomads`
  - __Pros:__
    - For Emplyees: Less stress, employment oportunities for single parents and people with disabilities
    - For Employers: Incresed productivity, Staff Retention
  - __Cons:__
    - For Employees: Feeling of isolation, Potentially slower Promotions
    - For Employers: Difficulty in supervising work, potential information security problems, traning costs.